AB INITIO THEORETICAL STUDIES OF TRANSITION-METAL,
MOLECULAR, AND PHOTONIC BAND-GAP MATERIALS
by
ANDREW MARSHALL RAPPE
A. B. Chemistry and Physics, Harvard College
(1986)
Submitted to the Department of Physics and Chemistry in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY
at the
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
June 1992
© 1992 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved
Signature of Author
Certified by
//
Department of Physics and Chemistry
May 4, 1992
7 4•n D. Joannopoulos
Professor, Departrmlent of Physics
Thesis Supervisor
Accepted by
(I Robert Sioey, Chair
Depamental Graduate/Committee
Department of Physics and Chemistry
ARCHIVES
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE
OF TECHNOLOGY
/JUL 3 0 1992
LIBRARIES
AB INITIO THEORETICAL STUDIES OF TRANSITION-METAL, MOLECULAR,
AND PHOTONIC BAND-GAP MATERIALS
by
ANDREW MARSHALL, RAPPE
Submitted to the Department of Physics and Chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology on May 4, 1992 in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Physics and Chemistry
ABSTRACT
The first part of this thesis reports on improvements made to the plane-wave
pseudopotential method for performing electronic structure calculations within the local
density approximation of density functional theory. Pseudopotentials are designed which
require as few plane-wave basis functions as possible for the accurate description of any
element, within the conventional plane-wave pseudopotential method. Calculations are
performed using these methodological improvements. The structural properties of many
organic molecules are computed accurately without any experimental input. Also, two
proposed relaxed structures of a grain boundary in gold are studied, and the more favorable
structure is identified.
The second part of this thesis covers investigations into the electromagnetic properties of
materials with periodically modulated dielectric constants called photonic crystals.
Essentially exact solutions of Maxwell's equations are computed, allowing the prediction of
a number of new physical phenomena. This theoretical research predicts the existence of
localized modes about defects in photonic crystals, the existence of surface electromagnetic
modes on photonic crystals, and the existence of photonic crystals with two-dimensional
periodicity containing an in-plane photonic band gap. These results have been confirmed
by experiments, some of which are reported in the thesis as well.
Thesis Supervisor: Dr. John D. Joannopoulos
Title: Professor of Physics
2
This doctoral thesis has been examined by a Committee of the interdepartmental
committee in Physics and Chemistry as follows:
Professor Robert Silbev __
Professor John D. Joannopoulos
Chair
Thesis Supervisor
Professor Keith Nelson
2a
'mr 
, . _ .~~
2b
Acknowledgments:
I wish to thank all the members of Professor Joannopoulos' research group, past
and present, for providing a stimulating and supportive research environment. In
particular, I thank Karin Rabe and Thimios Kaxiras for showing me how exciting,
challenging and fun research in condensed matter physics could be. I am grateful to Bob
Meade for sharing his enthusiasm for life and sense of humor. I also thank my
collaborators Arnaldo, Paul, Mark, and Karl for the challenging problems we have tackled
together.
I am grateful to Professor Joannopoulos for choosing me to be in his research
group. I greatly value his efforts to make me a better scientist and a better person. His
high moral character, his dedication to excellent science, and his easygoing manner have
been an inspiration to me.
I thank my good friends Ben, Kamala, Jeff, Michael, Scott, Len, Estelle, Fred,
Heidi, Wick, Franklin, and Kipper for their constant support along this long road. Playing
bridge, rooting for Harvard's sports teams, and just visiting with me really helped me keep
my life together. I hope that we will remain friends forever.
But I owe my success to my family and to my beloved. Mom and Linda, you stood
by me when it really counted. I could never replace you and I feel fortunate to have you in
my life. I am proud to call you my family. Barri, there is no measure of my love for you
or my gratitude for the many ways you have helped me to reach this day. I love you.
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction 5
Chapter 1: Optimized Pseudopotentials 14
Chapter 2: The Design of Convergent and Transferable
Ab Initio Pseudopotentials 27
Chapter 3: A Test of the Utility of Plane Waves for the
Study of Molecules from First Principles 40
Chapter 4: Ab Initio Study of a Grain Boundary in Gold 51
Chapter 5: Photonic Bound States in Periodic Dielectric Materials 62
Chapter 6: Donor and Acceptor Modes in Photonic Band Structure 73
Chapter 7: The Existence of a Photonic Band Gap in Two Dimensions 85
Chapter 8: Measurement of Photonic Band Structure
in a Two-Dimensional Periodic Dielectric Array 97
Chapter 9: Electromagnetic Bloch Waves at the
Surface of a Photonic Crystal 109
4
Introduction
5
The wish to understand how the world works is a fundamental human yearning.
An expression of this understanding is the ability to predict the behavior of one's
surroundings and then experimentally to observe such behavior in accord with experiment.
The fundamental equations governing quantum-mechanical and electromagnetic systems
have been known for nearly a century. Solution of these equations should allow one in
principle to predict accurately the electronic and electromagnetic properties of any real
system. However, the exact solution of these equations is in general so demanding that it
cannot be accomplished exactly for any but the simplest systems. As a result, judicious
approximation of the governing equations and accurate solution of them has become an
active area of research in the physical sciences. This thesis will chronicle my contributions
to the advancement of computational methodology and my application of these new
methods in order to elucidate electronic and electromagnetic properties of real materials.
The interaction of quantum-mechanical particles via a Coulomb potential is
accurately formulated by quantum electrodynamics, but the use of this formalism for the
study of real materials is currently out of the question due to its complexity. To simplify
calculations, the nuclear degrees of freedom can be treated classically with very little loss of
accuracy. The electrons are so much lighter than the nuclei that they respond nearly
instantaneously to changes in nuclear positions (Born-Oppenheimer approximation). Now,
the quantum-mechanical portion of the calculation is the determination of electronic states in
an external potential, in conjunction with the classical motion of the nuclei according to the
forces placed on them.
Several approaches exist to solve for electronic states essentially exactly within the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation. For example, the quantum Monte Carlo method
directly applies the many-electron Schrodinger or Dirac equation, and samples the solution
statistically. The only error involved is the sampling error. This method yields
6
extraordinarily accurate results for a modest number of electrons l, but the computational
effort rises very swiftly as the number of electrons increases and the symmetry of the
system decreases. Therefore, it is not the method of choice for the study of large or
complicated systems. The same comment applies to the configuration interaction (CI)
method. By including all electron-electron correlations explicitly, its computational effort
scales exponentially with the number of electrons in the system.
Because the above methods do not provide information about large and complicated
systems of interest, other methods involving further approximations have been developed.
The Hartree-Fock method approximates the many-electron wavefunction as a Slater
determinant of one-electron wavefunctions. This insures that the wavefunction will have
the proper fermionic character, but it neglects many other electron-electron interactions.
Corrections to Hartree-Fock have been developed including Moller-Plesset perturbation
theory. These methods in general provide less accurate results than CI or quantum Monte
Carlo, but they are much more computationally tractable. As a result, Hartree-Fock and
corrections to it are the basis for most quantum chemistry investigations2 of molecular
structure and reactivity from first principles.
Another direction for computational effort has been toward semi-empirical
approaches. The embedded atom method3 and the MOPAC4 package are examples of
these. These methods rely on inputs from first-principles calculations and from experiment
to produce results. The chief difficulty with these methods is that while they accurately
reproduce results for the systems for which they were parametrized, they do not have a
good track record for predicting the properties of new systems. This severely limits their
utility.
1J. B. Anderson, C. A. Traynor, and B. M. Boghosian, preprint (1991); S. Fahy, X. W. Wang, and S. G.
Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1631 (1988).
2 W . J. Hehre, L. Radom, P. vR. Schleyer, and J. A. Pople, Ab Initio Molecular Orbital Theory (Wiley,
New York, 1986).
3 M. S. Daw and M. I. Baskes, Phys. Rev. B 29, 6443 (1984).
4 J. J. P. Stewart QCPE 455 6, 1986.
7
The use of density functional theory for the computation of the properties of real
materials quantum-mechanically has been steadily gaining in popularity in the last two
decades. This approach relies on the density functional theorem5 , which demonstrates that
a one-to-one mapping between ground-state electronic charge densities and total energies
exists. Therefore, it is possible in principle to insert a charge density into a functional
which returns the total energy corresponding to that charge density as accurately as if the
many-electron Dirac or Schrodinger equation had been solved. However, the density
functional theorem only proves the existence of such a functional and does not provide its
form explicitly. A number of tractable approximations to the density functional have been
formulated. The earliest and simplest, Thomas-Fermi theory, proposes a very simple
density functional to replace the kinetic energy term of the Schrodinger equation. It is just
not accurate enough for study of real materials.
The Kohn-Sham density functional6 is more complicated and realistic than the
Thomas-Fermi method. The density functional calculations reported in this thesis are based
on the Kohn-Sham approach. The kinetic energy corresponding to a given charge density
is written as the kinetic energy that a system of non-interacting electrons which have the
given charge density would have. The interaction of the external potential with the charge
density is included straightforwardly, and a Hartree term to include the bulk of the
interactions between the electrons is also added. To this a final term,, called the exchange-
correlation energy, is added. If this term could be determined exactly, the Kohn-Sham
density functional would yield exact total energies in the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation. But, as mentioned above, this term is not known exactly.
Several approximations to the exchange-correlation term have been developed for
the Kohn-Sham equation, and improvements to this term are an active area of research.
5p. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).
6W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
8
One of the most successful density functional exchange-correlation terms7 parametrizes a
series of quantum Monte Carlo calculations performed8 on electrons in a uniform external
potential. Because the external potential is uniform for these calculations, the parametrized
density functional can be taken to be local in real space. Thus, use of a potential of this
type constitutes the local density approximation (LDA). LDA calculations give the same
results as quantum Monte Carlo results when the external potential is uniform. This
suggests a natural extension to LDA, namely the addition of terms to the exchange-
correlation functional which depend on the gradient of the density 9, to provide more
accurate results when the density is changing rapidly. These methods appear to have
considerable merit for molecular systems. Another extension to LDA is the local spin
density approximation (LSD) 10, which includes the effects of spin into the calculation.
Despite the physical reasonableness of the Kohn-Sham equation, the use of
approximations to the exchange-correlation energy functional is an uncontrolled
approximation whose effect it is difficult to evaluate from first principles. The reason that
density functional theory in general and LDA in particular have become widespread in their
use is that countless calculations have been performed and the results give good agreement
with experiment for a wide variety of systems. For example, LDA calculations of lattice
parameters of crystals can generally be relied upon to fall within 1-2% of experiment. This
level of accuracy, although significantly lower than quantum Monte Carlo and CI, is
comparable with perturbation-theory-corrected Hartree Fock and much higher than Hartree
Fock or semi-empirical methods. In addition, density functional calculations scale much
better with problem size than any of the methods which provide similar accuracy.
Accordingly, the electronic structure calculations discussed in this thesis were all performed
7 J. p. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981).
8D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 566 (1980).
9 For current examples, see A. D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988); J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B 33,
8822, (1986).
10U. von Barth and L. Hedin, J. Phys. C 5, 1629 (1972).
9
within the LDA Kohn-Sham formalism.
A number of implementations of LDA exist, and each has its advantages. The
linear augmented plane wave methodl1 (LAPW) and the linear muffin-tin orbital method12
(LMTO) have been very successful for small to moderate size systems. For investigations
of the behavior of the core electrons in solids, the use of one of these approaches is
mandatory. Increasingly, however, the calculations on systems containing large numbers
of atoms are being performed with the pseudopotential method13 . This approach uses the
observation that core electrons react very slightly to changes in an atom's environment,
whereas valence electrons undergo significant changes. The pseudopotential replaces the
Coulomb potential of the nucleus and the core electrons, and it is designed so that the
ground eigenstates of the pseudopotential (pseudowavefunctions) closely resemble the
valence eigenstates of the Coulomb potential. In most pseudopotential
implementationsl4 15, the pseudopotential is chosen so that the pseudowavefunctions are
nodeless and match the valence eigenstates of the Coulomb potential outside the core
region, for distances from the nucleus greater than some value rc. The
pseudowavefunctions and all-electron eigenstates also have the same eigenvalues. Use of
the pseudopotential method allows one to avoid recalculating the core eigenstates in the
solid, and this is a significant advantage of the pseudopotential method.
Many basis sets have been used with pseudopotentials, including localized
orbitals16 , mixed bases of plane waves and localized orbitals1 7 18 , and finite elements on
variable grids 19. In particular, the plane-wave pseudopotential method20 currently enjoys
1 1L. F. Mattheiss and D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. B 33, 823 (1986).
120. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B 12, 3060 (1975).
13J. C. Phillips and L. Kleinman, Phys. Rev. 116, 287, 880 (1959).
14D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter, and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1494 (1979).
15 L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1425 (1982).
1 6j. R. Chelikowsky and M. Y. Chou, Phys. Rev. B 38, 7966 (1988).
17 M. H. Kang, R. C. Tatar, E. J. Mele and P. Soven, Phys. Rev. B 35, 5457 (1987).
18S. G. Louie, K. -M. Ho and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B 19, 1774 (1979).
19J. Bemholc, to be published.
2 0J. Ibm, A. Zunger, and M. L. Cohen, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 12, 4409 (1979).
10
widespread popularity. This is because the plane-wave basis set has a number of valuable
computational features. It is very straightforward to improve a finite plane-wave basis set
systematically. Another advantage is that the set of all plane waves is complete, whereas
approaches which include localized orbitals can have problems with over-completeness in
certain implementations. Also, the overlap integrals between plane-wave basis functions
are simple to calculate. Furthermore, the simplicity of plane waves allows the use of fast
Fourier transform algorithms and iterative diagonalization techniques21l 22 23 to enhance
efficiency. As a result, the plane-wave pseudopotential method is currently the most
efficient way to study the structural and electronic properties of complicated real materials
from first principles.
The first half of the thesis addresses the efficiency of pseudopotentials within the
plane-wave pseudopotential method. Chapter 1 explains the features of a pseudopotential
which predict its efficiency for plane-wave pseudopotential calculations, and it outlines a
procedure for the creation of efficient optimized pseudopotentials for any element which
require as few basis functions as possible. Chapter 1 also contains a demonstration of the
efficiency gain when this procedure is followed. Chapter 2 describes an augmentation to
the procedure in which the scattering properties of the pseudopotential and its efficiency can
be simultaneously improved. Chapter 3 explains the application of these optimized
pseudopotentials to a wide variety of organic molecules. Chapter 4 shows the application
of the optimized pseudopotentials to a gold grain boundary. Neither organic molecules nor
transition metals had been treated with plane waves and first-principles pseudopotentials
prior to this work. The development of the optimized pseudopotentials improved the
efficiency of the plane-wave pseudopotential method sufficiently to allow these systems to
be addressed.
2 1R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys.Rev. Lett. 55, 2471 (1985).
2 2M. P. Teter, M. C. Payne, and D. C. Allan, Phys. Rev. B 40, 12255 (1989).
23 M. J. Gillan, J. Phys.: Condensed Matter 1, 689 (1989).
11
One future direction for research is the application of optimized pseudopotentials to
other classes of systems which are not tractable without these pseudopotentials. Work is
already ongoing to study cuprate superconductors and carbon and gold defects in silicon.
A more distant goal is to revamp the pseudopotential formalism to make the pseudopotential
approximation more systematically improvable.
Maxwell's equations provide an exact description of the electromagnetic behavior of
materials. The only difficulty with their use is that to provide the positions of all the
electronic charges in a real material, one would have to solve the electronic system
quantum-mechanically before beginning an electromagnetic analysis, with all the problems
discussed above. However, for electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength much longer
than the interatomic spacing, this exact specification of charges is neither necessary nor
desirable. The electric and magnetic fields can be averaged over a region large compared to
the interatomic spacing but very small compared to the wavelength. The response of the
materials to electric and magnetic fields can be expressed as a scalar dielectric constant and
scalar diamagnetic constant. For many materials this yields essentially exact results. For
other materials, called nonlinear materials, these scalars must be supplemented with higher-
order tensor terms.
Recently, attention has been focused on materials which have periodically
modulated dielectric constants, called photonic crystals. For these periodic or nearly-
periodic systems, a plane-wave expansion of the solutions to Maxwell's equations in
macroscopic media brings the advantages discussed above. Theoretical 24 and
experimental 25 results have revealed structures made of materials with two different
dielectric constants arranged in a 3D periodic array which have a range of frequencies for
which no extended electromagnetic modes exist, called a photonic band gap. Chapter 5
explains the theoretical prediction that the introduction of a defect into such a structure can
2 4 K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan, C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3152 (1990).
25E. Yablonovitch and T. J. Gmitter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1950 (1989).
12
give rise to an exponentially localized electromagnetic state without the use of any metallic
shielding. Chapter 6 reports an experimental confirmation of such localized photon modes,
and compares experimental results with theoretical calculations. Chapter 7 discusses the
development of materials with 2D finite symmetry which possess an in-plane photonic
band gap. It also compares theoretical predictions and experimental results for one
particular structure. Chapter 8 is a detailed experimental confirmation of the predictions
pertaining to 2D photonic crystals. Chapter 9 discusses the prediction of the existence of
surface modes on photonic crystals under certain circumstances.
A major focus of future work in this area is the study of more complicated
electromagnetic systems. Work is in progress to recast the Maxwell's equations in a form
which requires significantly less computer time and memory to achieve results. In
addition, I plan to continue to study these photonic crystals theoretically and
experimentally. Future directions will include the modeling of systems containing metal
and dielectric, dissipative systems, and systems containing nonlinear materials.
13
Chapter 1: Optimized Pseudopotentials
in collaboration with
K. M. Rabe and E. Kaxiras
14
Theoretical studies based on ab initio electronic structure calculations are useful for
elucidating many materials problems in the physics of solids. Specialized basis sets (i.e.
other than plane waves) have proven to be effective for calculations of total energies and
band structures of solids.1 The use of such a set is vital if the behavior of the core
electrons of the solid is to be considered explicitly. However, the behavior of the core
electrons frequently has a minimal effect on properties of interest in the solid, and the
implicit inclusion of the core states into a pseudopotential opens up the possibility of using
a plane-wave basis for electronic structure calculations. This choice of basis has many
advantages for a wide range of calculations, including studies of forces on ions2, phonon
frequencies, corrections to quasiparticle self-energies3 , and dielectric matrices. 4 The plane-
wave basis provides controlled convergence and high numerical accuracy. In addition,
using this basis for the single-particle states allows for a convenient and unbiased
representation of the charge density. Furthermore, when a plane-wave basis is used, the
equation-of-motion method of Car and Parrinello 5 can be implemented to increase
calculational efficiency tremendously. The method is especially efficient when used with
the excellent fast Fourier-transform algorithms which are currently available.
The main drawback to using plane waves as a basis is that real materials require
many basis functions for their description. The problem of convergence becomes critical
for materials which have sharply peaked valence states. In describing these substances, a
prohibitive number of plane waves would be required, making the use of the conventional
plane-wave approach impossible. As a result, almost all ab initio calculations involving
transition metals and first-row nonmetals have been performed with specialized basis sets.1
1For example, see L. F. Mattheiss and D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. B 33, 823 (1986); C. T. Chan, D.
Vanderbilt, S. G. Louie, and J. R. Chelikowsky, Phys. Rev. B 33, 7941 (1986); M. H. Kang, R.
C. Tatar, E. J. Mele, and Paul Soven, Phys. Rev. B 35, 5457 (1987); 0. K. Andersen, Phys.
Rev. B 12, 3060 (1975), and references therein.
2j. Ihm, A. Zunger, and M. L. Cohen, J. Phys. C 12, 4409 (1979).
3 R. W. Godby, M. Schluter, and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2415 (1986).
4M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B 37, 2733 (1988).
5R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2471 (1985).
15
Optimizing the convergence with basis size of quantities of interest, including total
energy, would allow the benefits of the plane-wave-basis to be derived in as wide a class of
systems as possible. As a result, several approaches have been proposed to achieve this
goal. Most of these6 ,7,8 focus on improving the norm-conserving pseudopotentials9 which
have been very widely used in the literature to address problems in the theory of solids.
Each of these approaches was either designed for a specific case 6 or did not significantly
affect convergence of total energies.7.8 The purpose of this paper is to isolate those
features of a pseudopotential which are responsible for the convergence of the total energy
in a plane-wave basis. Having done that, we then formulate a criterion which can be used
to create a pseudopotential with optimal convergence and which should be applicable to any
element.
We have found that the convergence of the total energy of solids with plane-wave
basis size mirrors the convergence of the total energies of the isolated pseudoatoms which
comprise the solid. In physical terms, we can understand this correspondence by dividing
materials into four classes from the point of view of convergence. In the first class,
valence states in the atom and solid are very similar. For this class, which includes noble
gas solids and ionic solids, correspondence between atomic and solid convergence should
be excellent. The second class contains solids in which the valence electrons are distributed
nearly uniformly throughout the solid, such as free-electron metals. For these materials,
the solid valence states will require many fewer plane waves for convergence than the
atomic states. Consequently, they do not present a convergence problem, and their
convergence does not need to be optimized. The third class contains materials such as
transition metals which combine characteristics of the first two classes. In this class, some
valence states in the solid are free-electron-like and do not present a convergence problem,
6 For example, see Y. Bar-Yam, S. T. Pantelides, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 39, 3396 (1989).
7For example, see D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 32, 8412 (1985), and references therein.
8L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1425 (1982).
9 D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter, and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1494 (1979).
16
and others are highly peaked around each atomic site and resemble the corresponding
atomic eigenstates strongly. Because the latter states control convergence and because they
are similar in the atom and solid, materials in the third class have convergence properties
which correspond closely to those of the constituent atoms. In the fourth class are the
systems which exhibit covalent bonding. Here, no direct relationship between atom and
solid exists, since the states in the solid do not resemble the atomic states. However, the
bonding states in the solid are confined in interatomic regions of approximately the same
volume as the atomic states. Therefore, we expect convergence of atomic and solid total
energies to be similar for covalent systems as well.
We have checked these claims and found close correspondence between the
convergence of the atomic and solid total energies for a number of elements which are
particularly problematic to treat with standard plane-wave approaches because of slow
convergence. Specifically, we examined ionic, transition metal, and covalent systems
including oxygen, copper, and carbon. All the results are qualitatively very similar. Below
we discuss in detail and exhibit results for copper, which is about as difficult a case as
exists for the plane-wave method.
The fact that atomic and solid total energies do converge similarly for all solids for
which convergence is a problem presents a general criterion for the generation of optimally
convergent pseudopotentials: to make the total energies of solids converge optimally, it is
sufficient in principle to create pseudopotentials which give optimal total-energy
convergence for the constituent atoms. In practice, we implement this criterion with two
approximations; we require the potential to be continuous, and we optimize only the atomic
kinetic-energy convergence. It can be proven l0 using scaling arguments that total-energy
convergence and kinetic-energy convergence are very similar in the limit of large cutoff
energies. By requiring the pseudopotential to be continuous, we lower the cutoff energy
10 A. M. Rappe, K. M. Rabe, E. Kaxiras, and J. D. Joannopoulos (unpublished).
17
above which this is true. In fact, we have found kinetic-energy convergence to mirror
total-energy convergence for all continuous pseudopotentials which we have examined, for
all cutoff energies of interest. One or both of these approximations may be eliminated to
obtain marginally better results. The method we have chosen has the merits of
straightforwardness of implementation and numerical stability.
Our goal is to create an atomic pseudowavefunction which has a continuous
pseudopotential and kinetic-energy convergence to a certain level of tolerance in as small a
basis as possible. A pseudowavefunction gives rapid kinetic-energy convergence when the
high Fourier components of the pseudowavefunction contain very little kinetic energy. If
one simply minimizes the kinetic energy of the pseudowavefunction, as proposed by
Cohen and Heine, ll no control is exercised over the distribution of the remaining kinetic
energy among the Fourier components of the pseudowavefunction. To achieve optimal
convergence, the kinetic energy in the high Fourier components of the pseudowavefunction
must be minimized directly. To accomplish this, it is sufficient to minimize the portion of
the kinetic energy in the atomic pseudowavefunction above some cutoff qc in Fourier space
while ensuring that the pseudowavefurction has two continuous derivatives. We can begin
with any pseudowavefunction F(r) which matches the atomic eigenfunction smoothly at
r=rc. To it we add a correction function C(r), which optimizes the convergence of the
original wavefunction. The result is , the optimized wavefunction, which equals F+C for
rr¢ and which equals the all-electron wavefunction for r>rc. We find it efficient and
convenient to have an analytic form for F. In practice, we write F as a sum of four Bessel
functions whose wave vectors qi' are chosen o that their logarithmic derivatives match that
of the all-electron wavefunction, 1l(r), at rc:
F(r) = ajil(qi'r); j(qirc) = (rc) (1)
i=l R 
11M. H. Cohen and V. Heine, Phys. Rev. 122, 1821 (1961).
18
The coefficients of these four functions are chosen to normalize the wavefunction and to
make it continuous with two continuous derivatives at r. Because normalization is a
quadratic constraint on the ai's, a sum of three Bessel functions cannot always be found
which satisfies these constraints. Accordingly, a fourth Bessel function is included whose
coefficient is chosen arbitrarily within the range of values which permits the constraints to
be met. To the expression F, we add C(r), which we expand in Bessel functions whose
wave vectors qi are chosen so that the functions have a node at r.
N
C(r) = ,3ijl(qir); jl(qirc) = 0 (2)
i=l
Lagrange multipliers enforce the constraints of normalization and continuity of two
derivatives at re, and the coefficients Pi of these Bessel functions are chosen to minimize
the kinetic energy beyond the cutoff q, which is expressed as follows:
00 qe
-Jd3r f 1*(r) V2 Tl(r) - Jd3q q2 I(q)l 2 (3)
The pseudopotential is calculated by directly inverting the Schrodinger equation.
This scheme for generating pseudopotentials has two parameters which may be
chosen differently depending upon the application. The parameter rc may be varied to
insure transferability of the pseudopotentials. For any given r, our method provides the
wavefunction which converges most rapidly. The other parameter, q, is determined
iteratively. A qc is chosen, and the amount of kinetic energy beyond qc is minimized.
Then qc is varied until exactly the tolerated quantity of kinetic energy is found beyond qc
after minimization.
We now illustrate this approach for the case of copper. We begin with an all-
electron calculation of an atom of Cul+ (3d94sO.7 54p0O.2 5). We pick the cutoff radius
19
rc=1.97 ao to be smaller than half the interatomic spacing. We optimize convergence for a
tolerance of 1 mRy, and this leads to qc=7.14. In the expression for F, a 4 is fixed equal to
0.5. Five Bessel functions are included in the correction function C for the potential we
present. (Extending the set of Bessel functions in C up to twenty gave only marginal
improvement of convergence.) The coefficients and wave vectors for F and C are
contained in Table I.
Function F Function C
i ai qi' i pi qi
1 1.619452 2.278679 1 0.203543 2.926964
2 2.436893 3.921348 2 -0.448616 4.618887
3 1.744898 5.536289 3 -0.827052 6.258186
4 0.500000 7.142447 4 -0.169339 7.879067
5 0.016011 9.491198
TABLE I. Expansion of the optimized d pseudowavefunction for r<rc.
Coefficients and wave vectors of the spherical Bessel functions of angular
momentum 2 are provided in atomic units for functions F and C, which are
defined in the text.
As a test of the improvement achieved, we compare the convergence of our
optimized potential to a pseudopotential created by the standard method of Hamann,
Schluter, and Chiang (HSC).9 We optimized only the d pseudopotential, because the d
electrons clearly govern convergence, even after optimization. The s and p wavefunctions
have r,'s of 2.6 a. We choose the HSC d wavefunction so that the HSC and new
wavefunctions match the all-electron wavefunction exactly for the same range of radius,
r,=1.97 ao. The d wavefunctions of these two potentials and their Fourier transforms are
compared in Fig. 1. Notice that although the two pseudowavefunctions are quite similar in
real space, the new wavefunction has a Fourier transform which converges much more
20
1.4
q(r)
(a.u.)
0
0 I 2 3 4
r (acu)
0
+(k)
(a.u)
(b)
I \t
I I
, ,
I S I 
I I
I.I
II II
-0.04 I / I
6 7 8 9 10
k (/' )
FIG. 1. Pseudowavefunctions (a) in real space and (b) in Fourier space,
for the copper 3d eigenstate, generated by the HSC method (dashed line)
and by the present approach (solid line). The pseudowavefunctions are
normalized to unity.
21
I
rapidly. The ionic pseudopotentials which give rise to these wavefunctions are compared
in Fig. 2. The new potential is deeper and somewhat less convergent in Fourier space than
the HSC potential. If potential well-depth or potential Fourier-transform convergence were
used as criteria7 , the HSC potential would be considered preferable to the optimized
potential. However, the criterion of atomic total-energy convergence indicates that the
optimized potential is far superior. In Fig. 3, we show by solid lines the atomic total
energy as a function of wave vector for both pseudopotentials. This calculation predicts
that the total energy of solid copper will converge to within 1 mRy at a plane-wave cutoff
energy of 50 Ry (500 plane waves for fcc copper) with the new pseudopotential, whereas
the same level of convergence for the HSC case requires a cutoff of 115 Ry (1700 plane
waves for fcc copper).
In order to verify the predictions of the atomic calculations, these pseudopotentials
were then used to calculate the total energy of fcc copper at the experimental lattice
constant. For these calculations we used 256 k points in Brillouin zone (10 in the
irreducible sector). 12 The results are plotted as dots in Fig. 3. The close correlation
between atomic and solid total-energy curves both for the standard HSC potential and for
our new potential shows that the criterion of atomic total-energy convergence does indeed
have great predictive power in general. In addition, the fact that a potential which was
created to optimize atomic total-energy convergence also exhibits a large improvement in
convergence of the solid total energy, shows that we have gone beyond identifying a valid
criterion and have produced and exhibited a potential which possesses markedly improved
convergence.
Using this new pseudopotential, we performed the first ab initio plane-wave basis
determination of the structural properties of a noble metal. We computed the total energy of
fcc copper at 15 atomic volumes ranging from a 27% compression to a 34% expansion
12H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B 13, 5188 (1976).
22
0
F -o
z
LL
1 -200
-30
2)
L -40
0 -50
0 1 2 3 4
r (a.u)
FIG. 2. Pseudopotentials for the copper 3d eigenstate using the HSC
method (dashed line) and the present approach (solid line).
23
a)
(9
LLJz
LJ
0
6
4
2
0
40 60 80
PLANEWAVE CUTOFF (Ry)
FIG. 3. Atomic (solid lines) and fcc solid (dots) total energies as a function
of cutoff energy for copper in the HSC and present approaches. The zero
of atomic total energy for each pseudopotential was chosen to be the total
atomic energy at a cutoff energy of 324 Ry. The zero of solid total energy
was chosen for each pseudopotential so that the atomic and solid total
energies coincide at a cutoff energy of 80 Ry.
24
relative to the calculated equilibrium volume. For these calculations, we used 1372 k
points in the Brillouin zone (44 in the irreducible sector) and a cutoff energy of 50 Ry, the
value predicted by the atomic calculation. The enlarged k point set was essential to
describe the shape of the Fermi surface realistically. Using 50 Ry as a cutoff energy
insures that all total energies are converged to within 1 mRy. This tolerance is an upper
bound to the convergence of all energy differences, and energy differences between similar
structures will probably be converged to a much more stringent tolerance. Accordingly, a
much smaller cutoff energy may be used for many applications. The equilibrium lattice
constant, cohesive energy, and bulk modulus of fcc copper which result from these
calculations agree very well with experiment. Experimental and calculated bulk properties
of fcc copper are compared in Table II.
Experiment Present % Difference
Lattice constant (a. u.) 6.81 6.84 + 0.4
Cohesive energy (Ry/atom) 0.257 0.292 +13.6
Bulk modulus (MBar) 1.42 1.63 + 14.8
TABLE II. Comparison of the bulk properties of fcc copper as obtained by
the present method of calculation to experimental values.
In conclusion, we have addressed the problem of improving convergence in a
plane-wave basis. We identify the essential features of a pseudopotential which determine
its convergence properties. From this, we develop a criterion which we use to create
optimally convergent pseudopotentials. Using this principle, it should be possible to
optimize the convergence characteristics for any atom, without sacrificing accuracy. This
makes it possible to scrutinize solids containing transition metals and first-row nonmetals
with the plane-wave pseudopotential formalism. As a result of this work, we envision that
25
the simplicity and versatility of calculations using a plane-wave basis can now be extended
to a wide range of ionic, covalent, and transition metal systems.
We thank Dr. Oscar Alerhand for stimulating discussions. This work was
supported in part by the Office of Naval Research Contract No. N000 14-86-K-0158 and
the U. S. Joint Services Electronics Program Contract No. DAAL-03-86-K-0002. One of
us (A. M. R.) would like to acknowledge partial financial support from the Office of Naval
Research.
26
Chapter 2: The Design of Convergent and Transferable Ab Initio
Pseudopotentials
27
The sharply-peaked atomic wavefunctions of the first-row nonmetals and transition
metals are very difficult to describe in a plane-wave basis set. For this reason, specialized
basis sets have been the method of choice for most ab initio descriptions of materials
containing these elements. Because the plane-wave pseudopotential method has many
positive features, there is great interest in developing pseudopotentials which have
sufficiently good convergence and transferability characteristics to allow the study of these
"problem" elements.
Our work 1 has demonstrated that a key element in the creation of tractable
pseudopotentials is the control of the convergence of the total energy of the free atom
described by a pseudopotential, i.e. the pseudoatom. This is because the convergence of a
pseudoatom's total energy and that of solids containing the pseudoatom are remarkably
similar in a wide range of materials, as discussed in Chapter 1. Furthermore, our work
shows that the convergence of the kinetic energy of the pseudoatom is an excellent
predictor of the convergence of the total energy of the pseudoatom, and therefore of the
total energy of solids containing that pseudoatom as well.
The convergence of the kinetic energy of the pseudowavefunction is a powerful
predictor of the convergence characteristics of the pseudopotential in solid-state
environments because its validity is independent of the method chosen for insuring
transferability. To illustrate this fact, we demonstrate the use of this atomic criterion to
generate high-quality pseudopotentials within three different pseudopotential formalisms.
First, the use of the criterion with simple norm conservation is illustrated for the case of
copper. Next, the criterion is used in conjunction with a transferability criterion involving
explicit optimization of logarithmic derivatives at several energies. Finally, the use of the
criterion within the nonlocal generalized eigenvalue formalism of Vanderbilt 2 is discussed.
1A. M. Rappe, K. M. Rabe, E. Kaxiras, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 41, 1227 (1990).
2 D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 41, 7892 (1990).
28
Because the convergence of the kinetic energy of the pseudowavefunction mirrors
the convergence characteristics of the pseudopotential in the solid, it is desirable to create a
pseudowavefunction with rapid kinetic-energy convergence. Here, we demonstrate a
particularly simple way to achieve this goal. We create a pseudowavefunction whose
Fourier transform possesses a minimal amount of kinetic energy beyond a cutoff qc. This
will provide good convergence using a plane-wave cutoff energy equal to (qc)2, using
Rydberg energy units. This wavefunction also matches the all-electron wavefunction
outside a real-space cutoff radius r, conserves norm, and has the same eigenvalue as the
all-electron reference state.
The method of optimizing the pseudowavefunction described here gives the same
results as the method of Chapter 1. This is because the same quantity is minimized in both
cases, and the same constraints are applied. Here, a simpler basis set is used to span the
space of possible pseudowavefunctions, and this makes the present method conceptually
and computationally simpler. The wavefunction is constructed as follows. Inside r, the
wavefunction 1 is expanded in a complete set of spherical Bessel functions of the proper
angular momentum whose logarithmic derivatives at rc match that of the reference
wavefunction 1.
N
yl(r) = 0(rc - r) Yxijl(qir) + 0(r - r) 0l(r) (1)
i=l
where N~10 and the qi are wave vectors chosen to match
jl(qirc) _- (rc) (2)jl(qirc) - I(rc)
The kinetic energy KEq>q. of the wavefunction beyond qc is conveniently expressed as the
difference between the kinetic energy in real space and the kinetic energy from 0 to q in
Fourier space.
29
c~~o qc
KEq>qc = Jd3r (r) V24,(r) - d3q q2 I(q)I 2 (3)
This is the quantity we wish to minimize. All of the integrals remain the same throughout
the calculation and can therefore be tabulated. Defining the following integrals,
rc
Ai = dr r2 jl(qir)]2 (4)
Bi(q) = r r2 jl(qir) j(qr) (5)
C(q) = fdr r2 jl(qr) 01(r) (6)
rc
qc
DO = Jdq q4 ) Bi(q) (7)
qc
Ei= q4 Bi(q) C(q) (8)
00
F = fdr r2 0 (r) V2 1 (r) (9)
rc
qe
G = dq q4 [C(q)]2 (10)
the expression for KEq>ql may be rewritten
KEq>qc = a[( i Ai - F]- xiaDiJ + 2 oiE + G (11)
j==1 i i=I=
We now wish to minimize KEq,qc subject to the constraints of norm conservation and
wavefunction smoothness at r. This minimization can be performed rapidly by various
30
scientific computer library minimization subroutines. The calculation takes us about five
CPU seconds on a Cray-2.
The application of this procedure to copper greatly improves the convergence
properties of the total energy for both a single copper pseudoatom and for copper fcc solid
relative to the same calculations performed using a standard norm-conserving
pseudopotential of the Hamann, Schluter, Chiang type (HSC)3 in exactly the same way that
the method described in Chapter 1 did. Table 1 compares the bulk properties of fcc copper
as calculated using the new pseudopotential to the results of an LAPW calculation 4 and to
experimental values. The comparison to experiment must be taken simply as a context
because (for simplicity) neither of the theoretical calculations includes relativistic effects,
and both theoretical results include spin-polarization effects only as a correction added to
the atomic total energy. Even so, the agreement between the theoretical results is quite
good, suggesting that the convergence and transferability of copper are satisfactory for the
study of copper (and presumably other transition metals) with these pseudopotentials. The
comparison between the current pseudopotential method and LAPW results for bulk fcc
copper is made in more detail in Figure 1, which shows the total energy versus volume
curves obtained by each method.
Experiment This work LAPW
Lattice constant (A) 3.60 3.62 3.57
Cohesive energy (eV/atom) 3.50 3.97 4.19
Bulk Modulus (MBar) 1.42 1.63 1.72
TABLE I. A comparison of the bulk properties of fcc copper as calculated
by optimized pseudopotential and LAPW methods with corresponding
experimental values.
3 D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter, and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1494 (1979).
4 Z. W. Lu, S.-H. Wei, and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 41, 2699 (1990), and S.-H. Wei, private
communication.
31
o EbindOPT
o Ebind LAPW
10 11 12
VOLUME/A3
13 14
FIG. 1. Graph of energy versus volume for fcc copper as calculated by the
pseudopotential method with an optimized pseudopotential and by the
LAPW method.
32
-3.9
-3.95 -
-4
-4.05
()
0
LUZ5
(zZ
Z
co
-4.1
/
V
-4.15
-4.2
9
JI ,i *~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
ii II , I . . i x w I i ill i I
I-
lI lI
The aforementioned procedure is most effective when the transferability needs of
the material are modest. In the particular example of copper, we obtained good agreement
with theory and experiment using a very large cutoff radius r of 1.97 ao. This is
acceptable because the copper atoms remain quite far apart in fcc copper, and the d
electrons do not participate strongly in bonding. In real space, one can view this as a small
region of significant overlap of d wavefunctions centered on different atoms. In energy
space, one can see this same phenomenon as a very small bandwidth for the d-like states.
As a result of this small interaction between neighboring d orbitals, a large core sphere may
be pseudized without affecting the important solid-state propertiess,6, and only a very small
range of energies about the valence eigenvalue need have correct logarithmic derivatives for
these properties to be obtained.
For other elements, this prescription is less effective. The pseudopotential
generating method described above insures a certain level of transferability due to the norm-
conservation condition and the matching of the valence wavefunction outside rc. However,
for elements which participate in strong covalent bonds, a larger bandwidth results, and
matching of the logarithmic derivative over a wider range is required.
Fortunately, a straightforward way of simultaneously controlling convergence and
transferability by optimizing pseudowavefunction kinetic energy and logarithmic
derivatives is readily available. We minimize the following expression:
[-d3r iV (r)V2!rl(r) -d3q q21il(q)12 (lp)i (x(Ei)-y(Ei))2 (12)
Here, X represents the logarithmic derivative for the all-electron potential as a function of
energy for some choice of diagnostic radius. The function y is the logarithmic derivative
for the pseudopotential at the same radius.
5 J. R. Chelikowsky and M. Y. Chou, Phys. Rev. B 38, 7966 (1988).
6 y. Bar-Yam, S. T. Pantelides, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 39, 3396 (1989).
33
For beta equal to unity, the pseudopotential with the fastest convergence results.
For beta equal to zero, the pseudopotential which best fits the all-electron logarithmic
derivative at a series of chosen energies is found. For beta between zero and one,
potentials with improved transferability and convergence are generated. The value of beta
phenomenologically represents the relative difficulties caused by convergence and
transferability error in a particular element.
The energies which were used for fitting the logarithmic derivative for the p
potential in carbon are shown in Figure 2. The pseudopotential logarithmic derivative
curve at the cutoff radius of 1.4 ao agrees well with the all-electron curve throughout the
bandwidth of diamond. It agrees with the all-electron result better than the HSC potential
used for comparison does. Figure 3 shows the superior convergence properties of the new
carbon pseudopotential relative to the HSC potential. In addition, the excellent agreement
between atom and solid gives further support to the validity of the atomic convergence
criterion in covalent materials. Thus, the enhanced prescription for pseudopotential
generation achieves improvement of convergence and transferability for a difficult test case.
Note that there is a marked similarity between this procedure for beta equal zero and the
procedure of Teter and Allan7 . They make no explicit provision for the control of
convergence characteristics, but the method for the control of transferability is quite similar.
This prescription has the advantage that it creates a single potential for each angular
momentum which has nearly the best overall characteristics of convergence and
transferability possible. For many elements, this allows in-depth analysis of materials
which is not possible or much more difficult using standard norm-conserving
pseudopotentials. We believe that little improvement over the current approach is possible
within the framework of a single potential per angular momentum. The Vanderbilt
7M. Teter and D. C. Allan, private communication.
34
2
0
wLI
> -2
w
0
I 4
_01
-6
-8
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2
E/Ry
FIG. 2. Logarithmic derivatives of carbon all-electron potential and HSC
and optimized pseudopotentials at rog = 1.4 ao.
35
o OPT Diamond
o HSC
--- OPT
Diamond
Atom
----- HSC Atom
0
30
4
40
I I
50 60
ECUT/Ry
70 80
FIG. 3. Convergence of the total energy of carbon as a free pseudoatom
and in diamond using HSC and optimized norm-conserving
pseudopotentials.
36
I
U
0.4
0.35 -
0.3 -
0.25 -
a)
--
UJ
0.2 -
I I
I
I \I
%
I'
\I 0
\T 
t0 0
¥. ~ ~ ~ ~ - 0
0.15 -
0.1 -
0.05 -
I · ' ·l -
.. _ _
.
r _
i
.
generalized eigenvalue approach is very promising because of its ability to reduce the plane-
wave requirements of calculations in return for an increase in the number of nonlocal
potentials. This is accomplished by the removal of the norm conservation constraint on the
wavefunctions through the use of a generalized eigenvalue formulation designed to correct
the charge deficiencies. We can use the same criterion of convergence of atomic kinetic
energy to design pseudopotentials with the best convergence in this formalism as well. In
fact, a simple computational implementation involves using our optimization procedure
without the norm conservation condition. The convergence properties of pseudopotentials
for carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen are shown in Figure 4. The cutoff radii for these
elements are 1.4 ao, 1.25 ao, and 1.35 ao respectively. A comparison of Figure 4 with
Figure 3 shows the enormous gains in convergence which are possible when norm
conservation is removed as a constraint.
This paper has demonstrated techniques for creating pseudopotentials which
possess excellent convergence and transferability properties. We stress the importance of
the convergence of the kinetic energy of the pseudoatom as an atomic convergence criterion
for the convergence of solids containing the pseudoatom. Regardless of the procedure
used to insure good transferability, utilization of the atomic convergence criterion
consistently leads to excellent convergence. The results of atomic and solid-state
calculations using these new pseudopotentials are exhibited, showing that excellent
convergence and transferability are consistently obtained when the atomic convergence
criterion is linked with an appropriate transferability criterion. These pseudopotentials
facilitate the study of many elements in the periodic table, including transition metals and
first-row nonmetals.
The authors should like to acknowledge the many contributions of Karin Rabe and
Efthimios Kaxiras in the early stages of this work. The authors also wish to thank Su-Huai
Wei for providing LAPW data for copper. This research was supported in part by the
Office of Naval Research Contract No. N000 14-86-K-0158, the U. S. Joint Services
37
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
(a)
0O
w
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
10 20 30 40 50
ECUT/Ry
FIG. 4. Convergence of the total energies of pseudoatoms of the first-row
nonmetals in non-norm-conserving formalism.
38
60
Electronics Program Contract No. DAAL-03-86-K-0002, and the U. S. Air Force Office of
Scientific Research Grant No. AFOSR-90-0276. One of us (A. M. R.) acknowledges the
support of the Joint Services Electronics Program.
39
Chapter 3: A Test of the Utility of Plane Waves for the Study of
Molecules from First Principles
in collaboration with
P. A. Bash
40
Density functional theoryl, 2 has recently shown significant promise3 ,4 as an
analytical tool for studying chemical systems from first principles. Currently, the
calculations of properties of molecules containing first-row elements are most commonly
performed using a basis set of localized orbitals for wavefunction expansions. The
purpose of this paper is to report results which indicate the viability of the plane-wave basis
set as an alternative choice for this expansion. First we will describe the salient features of
this computational method, and then we will exhibit structural results for a number of small
molecules.
The plane-wave basis set has a number of extremely desirable features. The set of
plane waves is complete and orthonormal. In addition, plane waves can be indexed by a
single vector index, the wave vector. These two properties make finite sets of plane waves
systematically improvable in a straightforward manner. A calculation is performed using a
basis set of all plane waves such that each plane wave's wave vector has a magnitude less
than some value, the plane wave cutoff. Then the basis set is improved by increasing the
plane-wave cutoff until the results converge. This systematic improvability provides
another advantage, the numerical stability of results. Another benefit of using plane waves
is that a priori knowledge of the electronic distribution is not required for the generation of
the basis set. Finally, there are extremely reliable and efficient methods for finding
electronic eigenstates and atomic positions5S6. The Car and Parrinello molecular dynamics
method7,8, because it allows simultaneous updates to wavefunctions and atoms, speeds up
calculations significantly relative to traditional matrix diagonalization approaches. The fast
IP. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).
2W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
3For a current survey see: Density Functional Methods in Chemistry, (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991).
4R. G. Parr and W. Yang, Density Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, (Oxford, New York, 1989).
5J. Ihm, A. Zunger, and M. L. Cohen, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 12, 4409 (1979).
6For reviews, see J. D. Joannopoulos in Physics of Disordered Materials, (Plenum Publishing, New York,
1985), and W. Pickett in Computer Physics Reports 9, 115 (1989).
7 R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys.Rev. Lett. 55, 2471 (1985).
8 M. C. Payne, J. D. Joannopoulos, D. C. Allan, M. P. Teter, and D. H. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56,
2656 (1986).
41
Fourier-transform algorithm improves the scaling of many parts of the calculation, and the
conjugate gradient technique9,10 for minimizing the electronic energy makes possible the
study of large molecules, whereas other minimization techniques exhibit instability as the
cell size becomes very large. The scaling behavior of the various parts of the calculation is
shown in Table I. A gauge of the computational time for this method is the time required to
calculate the total energy and quantum-mechanical forces on the ions in a particular
geometry. For the formamide molecule in a 7A box with a plane-wave cutoff of 544.232
eV (40 Rydbergs), this calculation requires approximately 450 CPU seconds on a Cray-2.
Step Scaling
Fourier transform of wavefunctions NbNpwln(N w)
acceleration of coefficients NbN wln(Npw)
forces on ions NblNpw
orthogonalization NbNbNpw
TABLE I. Scaling properties of the LDAP-PW method. Here Nb is the
number of filled bands (orbitals), Ni is the number of ions, and Npw is the
number of plane waves. Npw is roughly 100 times larger than Nb, which is
twice the size of Ni.
The chief difficulty with using plane waves as a basis set is that sharply-peaked
functions require huge numbers of planes waves to converge. For this reason, expression
of core electrons using plane waves is extremely difficult. Because valence electrons are
orthogonalized to the core, even the expression of valence electrons is very difficult when
core electrons are included in the calculation. This problem has been surmounted by the
use of pseudopotentials l l 12. A pseudopotential is a weaker potential than the Coulomb
potential, and it includes the effects of the core electrons implicitly. To generate a
pseudopotential, a density functional calculation is normally performed on a free atom with
9M. P. Teter, M. C. Payne, and D. C. Allan, Phys. Rev. B 40, 12255 (1989).
10T. A. Arias, M. C. Payne, and J. D. Joannopoulos, preprint.
1 1J. C. Phillips, Phys. Rev. 112, 685 (1958).
12 V. Heine, and M. L. Cohen, Solid State Physics 24, (1970).
42
specified electron fillings of the orbitals. A pseudopotential is then constructed so that
outside the core region, its lowest eigenfunctions, called pseudowavefunctions, are
identical to the valence wavefunctions of the atomic calculation3, and corresponding states
have identical eigenvalues. The pseudopotential is also designed to reproduce the scattering
properties of the atomic potential as accurately as possible14 . Once it is designed with
reference to an atomic density functional calculation, the pseudopotential is used without
modification in any chemical environment. The pseudopotential approximation is
motivated by the observation that valence electrons account for all chemical properties of
atoms to a very large extent. Some core relaxation is neglected by this approach, but
generalizations of the pseudopotential approximation can include this effect, and for many
chemical systems of interest, the core relaxation effect is indeed negligible. Thus, the
pseudopotential approximation greatly reduces the plane-wave requirements, making
density functional calculations with plane waves tractable and leaving the vital chemical
interactions intact.
Although pseudopotentials provide a huge gain in computational efficiency, the
elements in the first row of the periodic table are still very difficult to describe with plane
waves, and for this reason very few plane-wave pseudopotential calculations have been
performed on materials containing these elements. Recently, significant advances have
been made toward making pseudopotentials for these elements which give converged
results with a lower plane-wave cutoff15,16. We use pseudopotentials which are designed
to give the most convergent results possible and still provide accuracy1 7,18 using the
efficient nonlocal pseudopotential form of Kleinman and Bylander 19 . These
13 D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter, and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1494 (1979).
14 D. C. Allan and M. P. Teter, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 73, 3247 (1990).
15. R. Chelikowsky and M. Y. Chou, Phys. Rev. B 38, 7966 (1988).
16 y. Bar-Yam, S. T. Pantelides, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 39, 3396 (1989).
17 A. M. Rappe, K. M. Rabe, E. Kaxiras, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 41, 1227 (1990).
18 A. M. Rappe and J. D. Joannopoulos, Computer Simulation in Materials Science (Kluwer, the
Netherlands, 1991), pp. 409-422.
19 L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1425 (1982).
43
pseudopotentials increase computational efficiency sufficiently to allow calculation of the
properties of fairly large molecules. Recent generalizations of the pseudopotential form20
hold great promise that even more efficient pseudopotentials will be available in the near
future.
Another difficulty with plane waves is that they enforce a periodicity not present in
most molecules. A plane-wave basis set is directly applicable to systems which exhibit
discrete translational symmetry, so the plane-wave pseudopotential method has been used
extensively for crystalline materials. The supercell method greatly expands the class of
materials which can be studied with plane waves. In this method, an aperiodic system is
placed at each site of a three-dimensional lattice of points, thereby restoring periodicity. In
the limit that the lattice points are extremely far apart, the aperiodic system is modeled
accurately. Computationally, one systematically increases the lattice spacing and filters out
the effects of the induced periodicity21 .
Because the plane-wave pseudopotential method has a number of positive features
as described above, we wish to examine whether it is a viable alternative method for
performing high-level ab initio quantum chemistry calculations2 2 ,23 ,2 4 25 ,26. This
involves testing the ability of pseudopotentials to provide accurate results for first-row
atoms, the ability of plane waves to describe the valence wavefunctions efficiently, and the
ability of the supercell method to mimic an isolated system. All of these computational
aspects are completely independent of the exchange-correlation functional, and so for
simplicity, we use a local density approximation27, 28 to this functional. For more realistic
2 0For examples, see D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 41, 7892 (1990); K. Laasonen, R. Car, C. Lee, and D.
Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 43, 6796 (1991); R. D. King-Smith, M. C. Payne, and J. S. Lin,
preprint (1991).
2 1 G. A. Baraff and M. A. Schluter, Phys. Rev. B 19, 4965 (1979).
2 2D. Hohl, R. O. Jones, R. Car, and M. Parrinello, Chem. Phys. Lett. 139, 540 (1987).
2 3D. Hohl, R. O. Jones, R. Car, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 6823 (1988).
24 D. Hohl, R. O. Jones, R. Car, and M. Parrinello, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 111, 825 (1989).
25 R. 0. Jones, and D. Hohl, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112, 2590 (1990).
26 D. C. Allan and M. P. Teter, private communication (1990).
27J. p. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981).
28 D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 566 (1980).
44
calculations, we must use a more accurate functional, but the performance of the LDAP-
PW (local density approximation, pseudopotential, plane-wave) method will permit us to
gauge the effectiveness of pseudopotentials, plane waves, and supercells.
We generated pseudopotentials according to the methods described above, and
tested their convergence properties. All pseudopotential calculations of structural
parameters were very well converged using a plane-wave cutoff of 544.232 eV. For
example, increasing the cutoff to 816.348 eV changed the <(OCN) of formamide by less
than 0.1 degrees, and the r(CO) and r(CN) distances changed by 0.001 A and 0.013A
respectively. The accuracy of the pseudopotentials was also tested by calculating their
scattering properties and by comparing energy differences between different atomic
electronic filling states with the same energy differences evaluated by all-electron density
functional calculations. An exception is to be noted in the case of hydrogen. Because it
has no core electrons, we used the Coulomb potential to represent the hydrogen nucleus.
We tested the supercell method in two ways. We calculated structural properties of
a particular molecule with a certain lattice spacing, and then repeated the calculation with a
larger spacing. We found that as long as the lattice is large enough so that the van der
Waals radii of the molecule do not overlap with those of the neighboring molecules, the
results are completely insensitive to lattice spacing. For example, increasing the box size of
formamide from a 7.A cube to a 9A cube changed the <(OCN) by 0.1 degrees, the r(CO)
distance by 0.001i, and the r(CN) distance by 0.004A. In addition, we studied the effect
of changing the orientation of the molecules with respect to the translation axes. Here
again, as long as the molecules are well-separated, the change in structural parameters
when the molecules are reoriented is minimal. Again taking the formamide example, we
find that a 30 degree rotation of the molecule changed the bond angle by less than 0.1
degrees and the bond distances by less than 0.001A. One difficulty arises when molecules
are placed on a lattice. Even though no chemical bonding takes place between neighboring
molecules, and the bonds and angles are unaffected by periodicity, the long-range dipole-
45
dipole interactions slow down the calculations. All the molecules on the lattice rotate to
make their dipole moments align. These large distance (sometimes several angstroms)
motions to satisfy spurious intermolecular forces are much more time-consuming
computationally than the desired adjustments to attain the proper intramolecular geometry.
We have tested that the calculated properties of the molecule are the same in any orientation.
Therefore, we inhibit rotation of the molecule as a whole by the following procedure. We
compute the quantum-mechanical forces on all the nuclei. We keep one atom fixed at a
point. We constrain a second atom to move only on a particular line which passes through
the first atom, and force a third atom to move only within a plane which passes through the
first two atoms. All other atoms are free to follow the quantum-mechanical forces without
restriction. This allows all interatomic distances and angles to optimize freely, but it
prevents rigid rotation of the molecule.
To determine whether the LDAP-PW method and generalizations of it hold promise
for quantum chemistry, we calculated structural properties of a number of small molecules.
The calculations were done at a 544.232 eV plane-wave cutoff (with the exception of H2
which was done at 816.35 eV) and supercell sizes of 5.5A x 5.5A x 5.5A (4800 plane
waves), 7A x 7A x 7A (9900 plane waves), or 11A x 7A x 5A (11,100 plane waves)
depending on the molecule studied. The electronic degrees of freedom were relaxed until
the total energy of the molecule was within 104 eV/molecule of the converged value.
Molecular geometries were considered to be converged when forces on the atoms were less
than 0.01 eV/A; optimizations beyond this level changed structures by less than 1%. Initial
starting configurations for H2 0, CH4, and NH3, were such that the hydrogen atoms were
placed at right angles to one another and a distance of about 1.0oA from their associated
heavy atom. The initial coordinates for all other molecules were taken from AMI semi-
empirical calculations using the MOPAC29 program.
29 j. J. P. Stewart QCPE 455 6, 1986.
46
Molecule
H2
02
N2
P2
CO
CO 2
H2 0
CH4
NH 3
PH3
H 202
N2H2
H2CO
C2H2
HNC
HNO
Parameter
r(HH)
r(OO)
r(NN)
r(PP)
r(CO)
r(CO)
r(OH)
<(HOH)
r(CH)
r(NH)
<(HNH)
r(PH)
<(HPH)
r(OO)
r(OH)
<(OOH)
to(HOOH)
r(NN)
r(NH)
<(NNH)
r(CO)
r(CH)
<(HCH)
r(CC)
r(CH)
r(NC)
r(HN)
r(NO)
r(HN)
<(HNO)
Exp.
0.742
1.208
1.098
1.893
1.128
1.162
0.958
104.5
1.092
1.012
106.7
1.420
93.3
1.452
0.965
100.0
119.1
1.252
1.028
106.9
1.208
1.116
116.5
1.203
1.061
1.169
0.994
1.212
1.063
108.6
MP2
0.738
1.242
1.131
1.936
1.151
0.969
104.0
1.090
1.017
106.3
1.415
94.6
1.467
0.976
98.7
121.3
1.267
1.036
105.4
1.221
1.104
115.6
1.218
1.066
1.187
1.002
1.237
1.058
107.3
TABLE II. See caption next page.
47
A 1
0.064
0.034
0.033
0.043
0.023
0.011
0.5
0.002
0.005
0.4
0.005
1.3
0.015
0.011
1.3
2.2
0.015
0.008
1.5
0.013
0.012
0.9
0.015
0.005
0.018
0.008
0.025
0.005
1.3
LDAP-PW
0.776
1.183
1.099
1.875
1.138
1.170
0.976
104.0
1.102
1.028
105.7
1.440
91.6
1.414
0.982
100.2
118.7
1.233
1.052
107.2
1.205
1.135
116.4
1.196
1.058
1.178
1.018
1.188
1.093
109.2
A2
0.054
0.025
0.001
0.018
0.010
0.008
0.018
0.5
0.010
0.016
1.0
0.020
1.7
0.038
0.017
0.2
0.4
0.019
0.024
0.3
0.003
0.019
0.1
0.007
0.003
0.009
0.024
0.024
0.030
0.6
0.038
0.059
0.032
0.061
0.013
0.007
0.0
0.012
0.011
0.6
0.025
3.0
0.053
0.006
1.5
2.6
0.034
0.016
1.8
0.016
0.031
0.8
0.022
0.008
0.009
0.016
0.049
0.035
1.9
Molecule Parameter
Formamide r(CO)
(HCONH 2) r(CN)
<(OCN)
Glycine r(C=O)
(NH 2CH 2 r(CO2 )
C0 102 H) r(CC)
r(NC)
<(O:C02)
<(O2 CC)
<(o1CC)
<(CCN)
H2PO4-1 r(PO)
r(P-OH)
<(HO-P-OH)
<(O-P-OH)
<(O-P-O)
3-hydroxy- r(O-H)
acrylaldehyde r(O...H)
(HOCHCHCHO)
Exp
1.193
1.376
124.7
0.969
1.680
MP2
1.224
1.361
124.8
1.218
1.358
1.515
1.451
123.2
111.4
125.4
114.9
1.510
1.680
101.1
106.9
126.2
0.994
1.694
A1
0.051
0.015
0.1
0.025
0.014
LDAP-PW
1.217
1.365
124.9
1.204
1.345
1.535
1.460
123.7
111.9
124.4
114.8
1.482
1.640
101.2
107.1
125.2
1.079
1.418
A2
0.0o4
0.011
0.2
0.110
0.262
0.007
0.004
0.1
0.014
0.013
0.020
0.009
0.5
0.5
1.0
0.1
0.028
0.040
0.1
0.2
1.0
0.085
0.276
TABLE II. A comparison of LDAP-PW geometry optimizations with
experiment and with MP2. All experimental and MP2 values are taken from
reference 32 except those of glycine, H2PO4-1 , and 3-hydroxy-
acrylaldehyde 3 0,3 1 which were optimized using Gaussian 90 1at MP 2 / 6-
31G*, MP2 / 6-31+G*, and MP2 / 6-31G** respectively. Ae and Ae are
the deviations of the MP2 and LDAP-PW calculations from experiment, and
AG is the deviation of LDAP-PW from the MP2 values.
3 0j. S. Binkley, M. J. Frisch, and H. F. Schaefer III, Chem. Phys. Lett. 126, 1 (1986).
31S. L. Baughcum, R. W. Duerst, W. F. Rowe, Z. Smith, and E. B. Wilson, J. Am Chem. Soc. 103,
6296 (1981).
48
__ _____ __
Table II lists the results of the calculations and compares them with both
experimental values and MP2 / 6-31G*, MP2 / 6-31+G* or MP2 / 6-31G** Hartree-
Fock3 2 calculations. Overall agreement of LDAP-PW with experiment and MP2
calculations is excellent. Average deviations from experiment and MP2 are 0.030A and
0.034A for bond lengths and 0.5 degrees and 1.0 degrees for bond angles. These results
also compare favorably with localized orbital density functional methods. Reference 3 lists
several practical examples. If the hydrogen-bonded system 3-hydroxy-acrylaldehyde is not
included in the averages, the bond-length deviations become 0.017A and 0.024A
respectively. Upon closer examination, certain trends become apparent within the data
contained in Table II. The most striking pattern is that an LDAP-PW calculation of a bond
distance between two heavy (non-hydrogen) atoms is almost always closer to experiment
than the corresponding MP2 result. Conversely, bonds involving at least one hydrogen are
almost always calculated more accurately using MP2. In addition, bond angles which
include zero or one hydrogen atoms are almost always more accurate using LDAP-PW,
while those including two hydrogens are usually better reproduced by MP2. We believe
that these effects are due to the use of the LDA rather than a more accurate exchange-
correlation functional. The small size of hydrogen makes its charge density change over a
short length scale. Another trend which we have observed is that long bonds are
reproduced more poorly than short bonds by the LDAP-PW. As the atoms in a bond
separate, they act more like free atoms, and the LDA does a poorer job on free atoms than
on covalent materials33 . This effect is apparent in the 0-0 bond of H202 and the hydrogen
bond in 3-hydroxy-acrylaldehyde. The most striking deviation from MP2 and from
experimental results is the internal hydrogen bond in 3-hydroxy-acrylaldehyde. The
LCGTO-MCP-LSD method gave a O-H distance of 1.228A for this molecule (referred to
as malonaldehyde in reference 3). Our result of 1.418A is closer to experiment, but it is
32 W. J. Hehre, L. Radom, P. v.R. Schleyer, and J. A. Pople, Ab Initio Molecular Orbital Theory (Wiley,
New York, 1986).
3 3 S. Fahy, X. W. Wang, and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1631 (1988).
49
still 0.262A from the experimental value of 1.68A. The use of the plane-wave basis set
provides accurate solution of the density functional equations, and the inadequacy in the
local density approximation appears to be the main barrier to more highly accurate
calculations. Work is in progress to incorporate non-local corrections3 4 ,3 5.
These results show that the LDAP-PW method can produce accurate structural
parameters for molecules. The data suggest that the method which uses plane waves,
pseudopotentials, and supercells may be a useful alternative to standard ab initio quantum
mechanical methods for calculations on chemical systems. Future work will include more
realistic density functionals and tests of energetics of chemical transformations. In
addition, research is continuing to develop more efficient energy minimization algorithms
and superior pseudopotentials. These changes will improve the efficiency and accuracy of
the method for the study of periodic and aperiodic chemical and biochemical systems.
This research was supported in part by the Florida State University Supercomputer
Computations Research Institute which is partially funded by the U. S. Department of
Energy through Contract No. DE-FC05-85ER250000. We would also like to
acknowledge computer time provided by the Florida State University Computing Center,
the M. I. T. Supercomputer Facility, and the San Diego Supercomputer Center. One of us
(A. M. R.) is supported by a Joint Services Electronics Program Fellowship.
34A. D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988)
3 5j. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B 33, 8822, (1986).
50
Chapter 4: Ab Initio Study of a Grain Boundary in Gold
in collaboration with
M. Needels and P. D. Bristowe
51
It is now well established that ab initio molecular dynamics can be used effectively
to study the bulk and defect properties of sp-bonded materialsl 2,3,4,5,6. The principal
reason for this success lies in the ability to describe these materials accurately using "soft"
pseudopotentials and a limited plane-wave basis set. Clearly, it would be desirable to
extend this technique to other materials while still retaining the advantages of
pseudopotentials and plane waves. Transition metals are of interest because of their many
metallurgical applications but, as is well known, they are difficult to describe using
conventional pseudopotential theory. In particular, they require an extremely large number
of plane waves for total-energy convergence because of the presence of d orbitals which are
strongly localized but make an important contribution to the bonding7. Recently, however,
a new approach to constructing ab initio pseudopotentials has been proposed which
minimizes these problems. In this approach, the freedom in constructing the
pseudopotential is explicitly used to optimize the total-energy convergence of the solid8 .
Specifically, by optimizing the atomic kinetic energy and requiring the potential to be
continuous, a soft pseudopotential can be constructed which is more rapidly convergent
than a conventional pseudopotential. This has been demonstrated for the case of copper in
which the lattice constant, cohesive energy, and bulk modulus of that metal have been
computed efficiently and accurately8 .
In the present paper, we apply the optimized pseudopotential approach in an ab
initio molecular dynamics calculation of a grain boundary in the transition metal, gold.
Grain boundaries are important interfacial defects in metals and control many of the
physical properties of the material. Our objective is twofold. First, we wish to show that
1M. C. Payne, P. D. Bristowe, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1348 (1987).
2 M. Needels, M. C. Payne, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1765 (1987).
3 D. C. Allan and M. P. Teter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1136 (1987).
4G. W. Femrnando, G. -X. Qian, M. Weinert, and J. W. Davenport, Phys. Rev. B 40, 7985 (1989).
5C. Woodward, B. I. Min, R. Benedek, and J. Garner, Phys. Rev. B 39, 4853 (1989).
6R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2471 (1985).
7D. C. Allan and M. P. Teter, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 73, 3247 (1990).
8A. M. Rappe, K. M. Rabe, E. Kaxiras and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B41, 1227 (1990).
52
large complex transition metal systems can be investigated using plane-wave basis sets and,
second, that an energetically preferred model for a specific twist grain boundary can be
determined and compared to previous experimental and theoretical studies. The results
represent the first ab initio investigation of a grain boundary in a transition metal.
The computational methodology is as follows. We first tried using a
preconditioned conjugate gradient algorithm9. However, this approach failed miserably
since the total energy could not be converged to within ten eV because it began to oscillate
randomly. Therefore, we used a steepest-descent equation-of-motion algorithml 0. We
used an "optimized" non-local, norm-conserving, scalar-relativistic pseudopotential of the
Kleinman-Bylander formll. We constructed the pseudopotential by solving the Dirac
equation for the all-electron problem to obtain spin-up and spin-down pseudopotentials for
the s, p, and d angular momentum wavefunctionsl 2. The potentials are obtained by
pseudizing the valence major componentsl3,14 and minimizing the kinetic energy beyond a
cutoff 8,15 of 30 Ry. The scalar-relativistic potentials for each angular momentum are
obtained by averaging the spin-up and spin-down potentials by their respective
multiplicities 14. These "averaged" potentials had the same level of convergence as the spin-
dependent pseudopotentials.
The pseudopotential was tested in a number of ways. First, total-energy
differences between the atomic ground state configuration and several excited-state
configurations were calculated for the all-electron atom using the Dirac equation and the
pseudoatom using the Schrodinger equation. These energy differences agreed to within
9 M. P. Teter, M. C. Payne and D. C. Allan, Phys. Rev. B40, 12255 (1989).
10 M. C. Payne, J. D. Joannopoulos, D. C. Allan, M. P. Teter and D. H. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56,
2656 (1986).
11 L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1425 (1982).
12 The core radii are 2.25 a for all three angular momentum states; the reference configuration is
{XeSd 10 6s0 .56pO.5 .
13 D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1491 (1979).
14 G. B. Bachelet and M. Schluter, Phys. Rev. B 25, 2103 (1982).
1 5 A. M. Rappe and J. D. Joannopoulos, Computer Simulation in Materials Science (Kluwer, the
Netherlands, 1991), pp. 409-422.
53
1% in all cases. Second, the bulk properties of gold were calculated and are displayed in
Table I. The lattice constant and bulk modulus agree well with experimental and other
theoretical results16. The cohesive energy exceeds the experimental value, as expected for
any LDA calculation. However, our result agrees well with other theoretical values.
Experiment Present % Difference
Lattice constant (A) 4.079 4.086 + 0.2
Cohesive energy (eV/atom) 3.81 4.11 + 7.9
Bulk modulus (MBar) 1.732 1.95 + 12.6
TABLE I. Comparison of the bulk properties of gold as calculated in the
present work to experimental values. (plane-wave cutoff = 30 Ry; no. of k
points = 110)
The other aspects of the calculation were also tested. The supercell contained two
grain boundaries to maintain periodicity in the directions normal to the boundary plane.
Each grain consisted of six (002) planes of atoms with five atoms per plane. The
separation of the grain boundaries was tested, using the embedded atom method17, by
comparing grain boundary energies between the 12-layer supercell and an 80-layer cell.
The energy difference was small. This can be understood in terms of the small intrinsic
dislocation spacing of the boundary we are considering. Within elasticity theory, the
dislocation strain field decays on a length scale approximately equal to this spacing.
Convergence with respect to basis set size was checked by increasing the cutoff from 30
Ry, which we used for the grain boundary calculation (18000 plane waves), to 50 Ry. The
total energy of a one-atom unit cell of crystalline gold changed by less than 0.02 eV,
indicating that the calculation was very well converged with respect to the basis set size.
Brillouin zone averaging for the grain boundary was obtained by summing over three
1 6N. Takeuchi, C. T. Chan, and K. M. Ho, Phys. Rev. B 40, 1565 (1989).
17 M. S. Daw and M. I. Baskes, Phys. Rev. B 29, 6443 (1984).
54
special k points in the irreducible 1/16 of the Brillouin zone. The possibility of partially
filled and/or degenerate states occurring near the Fermi level was treated using a Gaussian
spreading scheme4 with a width of 0.05 eV. A priori, we estimated the accuracy of this k
point set to be somewhere between that using 28 and 60 k points in the bulk irreducible
Brillouin zone. To compute the energy of the grain boundaries, we used a reference total
energy of bulk gold obtained by using an identical k point sampling in a 10-atom unit cell
of bulk gold, which gives 24 k points in the irreducible 1/8 of the Brillouin zone, and an
energy of -890.212 eV/atom. As can be seen from Table II, with this level of k point
sampling, the absolute total energy is converged to a few meV/atom.
No. of k points in irreducible Energy/Atom (eV)
Brillouin Zone
19 -890.201
28 -890.192
44 -890.211
60 -890.215
85 -890.212
110 -890.215
TABLE II. Bulk k point convergence test. (plane-wave cutoff = 30 Ry)
The grain boundary of interest is the X = 5 (36.9° ) [001] twist boundary in gold
where . is the inverse density of coincidence sites.18 The perfect geometrical
configuration for this boundary is formed by rotating one fcc crystal with respect to another
by 36.90 about [001]. This boundary has been studied extensively using X-ray diffraction
techniques 19,2 0 and classical atomistic simulation methods2 0,21 . The X-ray investigations
have independently determined two distinct atomic models for the boundary which are
18W. Bollmann, Crystal Defects and Crystalline Interfaces (Springer, New York, 1970).
19 M. R. Fitzsimmons and S. L. Sass, Acta Metall. 36, 3101 (1988).
20I. Majid, P. D. Bristowe, and R. W. Balluffi, Phys. Rev. B 40, 2779 (1989).
2 1 p. D. Bristowe and A. G. Crocker, Philos. Mag. A 38, 487 (1978).
55
.0
0
0
O 3103
2
0
0
0
_ To
To
u
0 40I~~I
0o o
v 0
II
~ V I-I'(3
(a)
(b)
FIG. 1. Two models for the = 5 (36.9°) [001] twist boundary in gold:(a) MBB model, (b) FS model. Structures are shown in projection along[001] with two planes on either side of the boundary. Stacking sequence ofplanes is indicated by the vertical column of open and closed symbols.
Note that the MBB model is indistinguishable from the perfect unrelaxedgeometry on the scale of this figure.
56
o 0
a 0
0 0
o U
a 0
o 0
* 0
To 0
1 _ _~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
l_
Sruno'II J
*I
IJ 1W '-,
I
I
kr
shown in projection in Fig. 1. They are labeled the FS (Fitzsimmons-Sass) model and the
MBB (Majid-Bristowe-Balluffi) model. Note that the MBB model is almost
indistinguishable from the perfect geometrical configuration on the scale of this figure.
Both models can be characterized by rotational-like relaxations around a symmetry axis
passing through the center of the unit cell, but they differ in the magnitude of these
relaxations. The maximum relaxation exhibited by the FS model (relative to the unrelaxed
geometrical configuration) is about 0.7A which is approximately seven times as large as the
corresponding relaxation in the MBB model. It is not immediately obvious which model
should have the lower energy. However, it is noted that the FS model has 80 bond lengths
that are distorted by more than 5% whereas the MBB model has only 12.
The computed energies for the two twist boundary models are shown in Table III.
It is clear that the MBB model is energetically preferred over the FS model by more than a
factor of ten. The forces on the atoms were also computed and found to be two orders of
magnitude higher in the FS model compared to the MBB model. For the MBB model, the
atomic forces in the plane of the boundary were all less than 0.1 eV/A and those normal to
the boundary were less than 0.26 eV/A. This level of residual force is considered quite
satisfactory for this kind of calculation and therefore the structure is thought to be relatively
stable. On the other hand, the forces acting on the atoms in the FS model are so large than
the structure must be unstable. In Figure 2 we illustrate the direction and magnitude of
these forces as vectors projected onto the model structure.
The energy of both model structures have been computed previously using semi-
empirical methods20 .22. For comparison with the present calculations we present in Table
III the results of the embedded atom (EAM) calculations20 . It is seen that these calculations
also yield a much higher energy for the FS model (by a factor of about seven) compared to
the MBB model. In addition, the magnitude of the MBB model energy is remarkably close
2 2J. Budai, P. D. Bristowe, and S. L. Sass, Acta Metall. 31, 699 (1983).
57
0
0
o- 
I OeV A
FIG. 2. Forces acting on atoms in FS model determined from the
pseudopotential calculation. Only forces parallel to the boundary are shown
and are of order 10 eV/A. Forces normal to the boundary are of order 1
eV/A.
58
eV/A2 ergs/cm 2
Present Work
MBB Model 0.031 510
FS Model 0.483 7,731
Embedded Atom Method
MBB Model 0.032 522
FS Model 0.236 3,786
TABLE III. Computed twist boundary energies using ab initio method and
EAM.
to that computed using the ab initio method. However, the FS model energy computed
using EAM is smaller by a factor of two compared to the corresponding energy determined
from the ab initio approach. This difference can be explained by the highly distorted nature
of the FS model which results in large deviations in charge density. These deviations are
accurately treated in the ab initio calculation but are poorly described using EAM.
Nevertheless, the vector map showing the EAM forces on the atoms in the FS model is
very similar (at least in terms of the directions of the vectors) to that shown in Figure 2.
Since the FS model is known to relax back into the MBB model using EAM, it is
reasonable to assume that such relaxations would also occur in the ab initio calculation if
the atoms were free to move.
In Figure 3, we plot the planar charge density as a function of distance from the
grain boundary. The charge density for half our unit cell is shown. The six atomic layers
can be clearly identified as the six flat peaks. The grain boundary is at the middle of the
plot and corresponds to the minimum in charge density. This minimum is broader than the
other interlayer regions, as expected, because the interlayer distance is increased at the grain
boundary to prevent the atoms in the two grains from being too close together. However,
the minimum is also much deeper, being two thirds the average charge density in the unit
59
0 
O
b .
N
N
RG. 3foll .
'ne fom U '"
 gra
the plot. 
e grain 04-4A
60
o0
C:.o
O 0
io
bOundam
cell. Since there is a lack of fine structure in the charge density at the grain boundary, there
are apparently no localized electronic states associated with it.
In conclusion, we have successfully performed an ab initio molecular dynamics
calculation of the total energy of a grain boundary in the transition metal, gold. The
calculation was made possible through the application of an optimized pseudopotential and
a plane-wave basis set. In addition, we have confirmed the low energy and stability of the
MBB model for the : = 5 twist boundary in agreement with one of the previous studies.20
We envision further applications of this technique to the study of other defects in transition
metal systems.
This work was supported in part by the U. S. Air Force Office of Scientific
Research Contract No. 87-0098 and by the Department of Energy Grant No. DE-FG02-
87ER-45310. A. M. R. acknowledges the support of a Joint Services Electronics Program
Fellowship. We wish to thank Dr. Sverre Froyen for the use of his relativistic atomic
programs. Supercomputer time was provided by the National Science Foundation at the
San Diego Supercomputer Center. Additional support was provided by the M. I. T.
Supercomputer Facility.
61
Chapter 5: Photonic Bound States in Periodic Dielectric Materials
in collaboration with
R. D. Meade and K. D. Brommer
62
Recently, it has been suggested that a dielectric material with a three-dimensional
periodicity may have a "photonic gap" in its frequency spectrum in which propagating
electromagnetic modes are forbidden.l It has also been proposed that photonic states in
this forbidden region should be localized in all three dimensions.2 Calculations by Ho,
Chan, and Soukoulis have shown that a diamond lattice of dielectric spheres can indeed
have such a gap.3 In this paper, we show that lattice imperfections can introduce
exponentially localized states in the photonic band gap. We focus on the frequency
spectrum of dielectric structures containing defects in an otherwise perfect diamond lattice.
In our calculations, we consider impurities of two types, air spheres in the dielectric region
and dielectric spheres in the air region. In both cases, localized photon modes are found to
be introduced into the gap. Variation of the size of the impurity sphere leads to complete
tunability of the frequency of this localized mode.
Although localized modes are common in metallic cavities, these photonic bound
states are unique and physically interesting because they are localized in an entirely
dielectric medium. Moreover, they have discrete frequency spectra and may be constructed
from low-loss dielectric materials. Therefore, it may be possible to reduce the dissipation
inherent in metallic cavities, due to skin heating of the metallic walls, and produce discrete
modes with long lifetimes and correspondingly sharp frequency resonances. We propose
that this effect can be exploited to produce high-quality resonant cavities and filters in the
microwave and millimeter-wave regime.
In order to calculate the electromagnetic frequency spectrum of dielectric lattices, a
number of authors3 ,4 5 have suggested expanding the electromagnetic fields in a plane-
wave basis,
1E. Yablonovitch and T. J. Gmitter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1950 (1989).
2 E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).
3 K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan, C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3152 (1990).
4 K. M. Leung and Y. F. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2646 (1990).
5Ze Zhang and Sashi Satpathy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2650 (1990).
63
H(r) = I hG, A., ei(k+G)r, (1)
G =1,2
where k is in the Brillouin zone, G is summed over the reciprocal lattice, and ex are
orthogonal to (k+G). Maxwell's equations are then expressed as a simple eigenvalue
equation, 3
2- HHG( 2G' h A = (2 hG (2)
where c=1 and
-1 /~2-~2' 2 1'e~ l ) 2
H ,G = Ik + GI Ik + G'I £E,G' 2' l (3)
and ec 1G is the Fourier transform of the inverse of the dielectric function e(r). This
eigenvalue equation is then solved to yield the normal mode coefficients and frequencies of
the electromagnetic modes. Having solved for H(r) the other electromagnetic fields can be
determined simply. This technique provides a simple and powerful method to solve
problems in electrodynamics which takes full account of the vector nature of the
electromagnetic radiation. The approximations, the finite size of the plane-wave basis and
Fourier-transform grid, can both be improved systematically.
Of the three similar techniques discussed in Refs. 3-5, we chose to employ the
methods of Ho, Chan, and Soukoulis.3 First, they Fourier expand H(r) rather than E(r) or
D(r). Since E(r) and D(r) are discontinuous at interfaces between media with differing
dielectric constants, but H(r) is continuous (with discontinuities in its first derivatives), we
expect H(r) to have faster plane-wave convergence. Second, Ho, Chan, and Soukoulis3
expand H(r) in a basis of transverse plane waves, rather than expanding in a complete
basis, solving for the normal modes, and then projecting out the longitudinal solutions.
64
Although we would like to study the effect of a single defect in an otherwise perfect
lattice, computationally it is desirable to choose a system with a finite unit-cell size.
Therefore, we employ the supercell method in which we place one defect in a repeated cell
of atoms. In our calculations, we used the 8-atom conventional cell of diamond. We have
performed tests using larger supercells containing 16 and 32 atoms and found similar
results. We also considered supercells of 2, 4, 8, and 16 atoms containing dense
impurities in the (111) planes, in order to determine the dependence of bandwidth on
impurity separation. We expand in plane waves up to a finite frequency, including -130
plane waves per polarization, per primitive unit cell. Based on our calculations of a one-
dimensional system of periodic dielectric slabs, for which an exact solution is available, 6
we expect that the frequencies are correct to within 5% at this plane-wave cutoff.
Although fully converged calculations in these one-dimensional systems agreed to 0.1% we
found that convergence in absolute frequencies was relatively slow in comparison to
conventional electronic-structure calculations. We attribute this to the discontinuity in the
first derivative of H(r) at the dielectric surfaces. In order to calculate the density of states
D(o), we sampled the frequencies at 48 k points in the irreducible Brillouin zone of the 8-
atom unit cell, and then coarse grained the resulting frequencies. Although we have
checked explicitly that o(k) = vk at long wavelengths and therefore D(c)) 2, this is not
accurately represented in D(o) because of our coarse sampling of the Brillouin zone.
Since the existence of a photonic gap is a prerequisite for the existence of photonic
bound states, we chose to begin our search for localized modes considering a diamond
structure with a large gap to midgap ratio. Following the results of Ho, Chan, and
Soukoulis, 3 we considered the periodic arrangement of spheres of air in a dielectric
medium. We considered a material with dielectric constant of 35, and chose air spheres of
radius 0.29a, where a is the conventional lattice constant of the diamond cell. We
6 Hecht and Zajac, Optics, (Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, CA, 1979), p.315.
65
considered impurities of two types, air spheres in the dielectric region, which were located
at the hexagonal site,7 and dielectric spheres in the air region, which were located in the
bond-center site.7 We also studied a diamond lattice of dielectric spheres in air, and also
found evidence for photonic bound states when an air sphere was placed at the bond-center
site.
Since the applicability of a band structure breaks down when an impurity destroys
the translational symmetry of the dielectric lattice, we have calculated the density of states
of the impurity system. The density of states of the bulk diamond lattice and of diamond
with a single impurity are shown in Fig. 1. As in Ref. 3, we see that the perfect diamond
crystal has a gap in its photonic band structure. Placing an air sphere at the hexagonal site
introduces a single state in the gap, at ob. Since there are no traveling modes in the
diamond lattice at ob this must be a localized mode. This is verified in Fig. 2, which
shows that the field is localized about the defect. In fact, we find that bound states whose
frequencies are in the center of the gap have decay lengths as small as one lattice constant.
We expect that this length will diverge as the bound state frequency approaches the
continuum of extended states.
In Fig. 1 it appears that the localized modes are spread over a modest range of
frequencies. This is purely an artifact of our supercell technique. Because we are
considering an array of defect states each of which is localized over some finite distance,
there is tunneling between localized states on neighboring impurities. It is this hopping
between defect states that introduces a nonzero width to the impurity band. For simplicity,
we chose the maximum of the defect density of states to identify the actual position of the
impurity state. In the inset of Fig. 1, we show calculations of the bandwidth for increasing
impurity separations. This bandwidth decreases exponentially, as expected for
exponentially bound states. Of course, in an experiment the lattice will be of finite size,
7 M. Lannoo and J. Bourgoin, Point Defects in Semiconductors Y, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981), p. 8.
66
I f'IV
0 1 2 3 4
FREQUENCY (wa/c)
FIG. 1. Density of states in ideal diamond lattice (dashed line), and
diamond lattice with defect of radius 0. 15a located at hexagonal site (solid
line). Ideal diamond lattice has a gap in the density of states in which there
are no propagating modes. The defect introduces a single localized state in
this gap at ob. Inset shows the bandwidth Aco normal to a plane of
impurities as a function of the (11 I) impurity plane separation, 8. Note that
the bandwidth is exponential in the impurity separation, as expected for
exponentially bound states. Units of frequency are 2n/a, where a is lattice
constant of the conventional unit cell, and c = 1.
67
LJLJ
F-
U)
LL0
F-)
Z
I,
to
O)
Cn
L.-
O~
0
-J
2:
II
-4 -3 -2 -I 0 1 2 3 4
DISTANCE (/ r/a)
FIG. 2. H field associated with the state localized about a defect at thehexagonal site. H(r) is plotted along an axis which passes through theimpurity at r = 0, and extends in the [110] direction. Because of a mirrorsymmetry through the (110) plane, H(r) lies in the [1 io direction. Notethat the localized state shows exponential decay with the sign alternating
between neighboring cells.
68
and so the impurity mode will have some exponentially small amplitude at the walls of the
lattice. This will allow the localized state to tunnel out, and will introduce a finite width to
the frequency spectrum.
Qualitatively, we can understand this result by analogy with the more familiar case
of impurities in a crystal with a band gap in its electronic structure. Since the wavelength
of light is shorter in the dielectric, these regions are analogous to a region of deep potential
in the crystal. Inserting a dielectric impurity adds an attractive potential. Sufficiently
strong potentials can pull a state out of the photonic conduction band into the gap, and
increasing the attractive character decreases the bound-state frequency, see Fig. 3.
Similarly, adding an air sphere to the dielectric region is analogous to adding a repulsive
potential which pushes a state out of the photonic valence band. In fact, the addition of an
air sphere defect to the perfect diamond lattice decreased the number of valence states by
one, and it created one state in the gap. We found one notable difference between air and
dielectric impurities. While the presence of an air sphere creates a single, well-defined state
in the gap, the presence of a dielectric sphere introduces a number of states in the gap, the
lowest of which is doubly degenerate and is represented in Fig. 3.
Alternately, one can understand the localized mode as a three-dimensional Fabry-
Perot interferometer. 2 Since there are no propagating modes in the dielectric material with
frequencies in the gap, it behaves as a mirror to these frequencies. The defect, then, is
surrounded by reflecting walls, and the localized state is analogous to the familiar
resonances of a metallic cavity.
We have also considered potential microwave and millimeter-wave device
applications for periodic dielectric materials as resonant cavities and filters.
Materials with high dielectric constant are currently used to fabricate resonant cavities at
microwave and millimeter-wave frequencies.8 Dielectric cavities reduce the size and cost of
8 M. Dydyk, in Handbook of Microwave and Optical Components, edited by Kai Chang (Wiley, New York,
1989), Vol. 1, p. 191.
69
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
DEFECT RADIUS ( l00r/a)
FIG. 3. Frequencies of localized modes due to lattice defects as a function
of defect size. Open circles show frequencies of air spheres at the
hexagonal site, and solid circles show frequencies of dielectric spheres at
bond-centered sites. The dashed lines separate the regions of extended and
localized states. The radius of the defect is in units of a/100 and the
frequencies are in units of 2X/a, where a is the lattice constant of the
conventional unit cell, and c = 1.
70
4
CE
3
J
CYaW
LL
3
2
I
I I I
Extended States-
0 0 0 Localized
0 States00 ·-- --
~ 0
Extended States
I I I I I. 
0
___
I I I
microwave and millimeter-wave circuits by replacing bulky discrete metallic waveguides
and cavities with planar technology amenable to integrated circuit fabrication. However, all
planar circuits require metallic shielding in order to reduce radiation losses and to control
higher-order cavity modes. Since the fields attenuate only as l/r from a typical dielectric
cavity, conduction losses due to the shielding can be appreciable. Embedding these
dielectrics in a lattice will reduce these losses, since the field attenuates exponentially in the
lattice region.
Because of the strong localization in these lattices, it seems likely that impurities in
dielectric lattices will have less power dissipation than a well-polished metallic cavity. If
the power dissipation indeed turns out to be less, then dielectric lattices would certainly be
valuable as high-Q resonant cavities. Even if the power dissipation turns out to be greater,
there are still advantages. As one attempts to work at higher wavelengths, the small size of
a metallic cavity reduces the device power rating to levels that are too small for many
applications. It may be possible to store larger electric fields in dielectric lattices without
burning out the device.
A second potential application for periodic dielectric materials exploits the narrow
line width of the forbidden state in a manner similar to a Fabry-Perot interferometer. Since
a narrow transmission gap exists for all orientations, there are no collimation losses.
Secondly, it may be possible to tune the filter by moving the impurity within the dielectric
lattice.
In conclusion, we have performed calculations of the density of states of dielectric
lattices containing defects. We find that defects can introduce localized modes, whose
frequencies lie in the photonic band gap. We have studied size dependence of two types of
defects, air spheres in dielectric and dielectric spheres in air. Finally, we have outlined
potential device applications for localized modes in dielectric lattices.
We are grateful to Henry Mullaney for guidance on the microwave applications of'
local modes. We would also like to thank David Vanderbilt and Tomas Arias for helpful
71
discussions. Partial support for this work was provided by the Office of Naval Research
Contract No. N00014-86-K-0158. Finally, one of us (A. M. R.) would like to
acknowledge the support of the Joint Services Electronics Program.
72
Chapter 6: Donor and Acceptor Modes in Photonic Band Structure
in collaboration with
E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, R. D. Meade, and K. D. Brommer
73
There has been great progress recently in the creation of artificial three-
dimensionally periodic dielectric structures which are to photon waves as semiconductor
crystals are to electron waves. That is, these photonic crystals have a photonic band gap, a
band of frequencies in which electromagnetic waves are forbidden, irrespective of
propagation direction in space. Both face-centered-cubic lattice2 and diamond symmetry3
dielectric structures have now been shown to produce a photonic band gap.
The photonic band gap is very interesting in its own right. It is an energy band in
which optical modes, spontaneous emission, and zero-point fluctuations are all absent.
Nevertheless, the photonic band gap might actually be at its most interesting when the
perfect translational symmetry is disrupted in a controlled manner. For example, by
introducing a known degree of disorder, mobility edges and Anderson localization
transitions 4 can be investigated.
Lasers, perhaps the most interesting application, also require that the 3D
translational symmetry should be broken. Even while spontaneous emission into all 4ir sr
would be inhibited, a local electromagnetic mode is still necessary to accept the stimulated
emission. In effect the local defect-induced structure resembles a Fabry-Perot cavity,
except that it reflects radiation back upon itself in all 4n spatial directions. Independently,
Meade et. al.5 have proposed that this could be accomplished by introducing a simple
defect into the system.
The perfect three-dimensional translational symmetry of a dielectric structure can be
lifted in either one of two ways: (1) Extra dielectric material may be added to one of the
unit cells. We find that such a defect behaves very much like a donor atom in a
semiconductor. It gives rise to donor modes which have their origin at the bottom of the
1E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).
2 E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, and K. M. Leung, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 2295 (1991).
3 K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan, and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3125 (1990).
4S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2486 (1987).
5 R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 44, 13772 (1991).
74
conduction band. (2) Conversely, translational symmetry can be broken by removing
some dielectric material from one of the unit cells. Such defects resemble acceptor atoms in
semiconductors. The associated acceptor modes have their origin at the top of the valence
band. We will find that acceptor modes are particularly well-suited to act as laser
microresonator cavities. Indeed it appears that photonic crystals made of sapphire or other
low-loss dielectrics will make the highest-Q single-mode cavities (of volume -1X3)
covering all electromagnetic frequencies above the useful working range of
superconducting metallic cavities. The short-wavelength limit in the ultraviolet is set by the
availability of optical materials with refractive index >2, the threshold index2 .3 for the
existence of a photonic band gap.
For these experiments, we have chosen a face-centered-cubic (fcc) photonic crystal2
employing non-spherical atoms. This fcc structure lends itself readily to microfabrication
since it consists of intersecting drill holes2 which can be made by reactive ion etching.
While such microstructures have already been fabricated 6 in GaAs, we have chosen initially
to investigate local defect modes in larger structures on the scale of 1 cm wavelengths. We
selected a refractive index n-3.6 for the microwave material, matching that of the common
semiconductors Si and GaAs. Experiment is supplemented by theoretical calculations of
the photonic bound states.
Photonic crystals generally consist of a continuous three-dimensional web of
dielectric material, made up of interconnecting ribs. The Wigner-Seitz unit cell of our
photonic crystal2 is the standard fcc rhombic dodecahedron2 with "air atoms" created by
drill holes centered on the top three faces, which exit through the bottom three faces.
Figure 1 is a (1 10) cross section of our photonic crystal cutting through the center of a unit
cube. Shading represents dielectric material. The large dots are centered on the air atoms
and the rectangular dashed line is a face-diagonal cross section of the unit cube. Such
6 A. Scherer and B. P. van der Gaag (private communication).
75
0
0 l
le %
A
A
lI
u&-=
A- %
WA
,,," V
JW
* 0 F 
FIG. 1. A (110) cross-sectional view of our face-centered-cubic photonic
crystal2 consisting of nonspherical "air atoms" centered on the large dots.
Dielectric material is represented by the shaded area. The rectangular
dashed line is a face-diagonal cross section of the unit cube. Donor defects
consisted of a dielectric sphere centered in an atom We selected an acceptor
defect.as shown, centered in the unit cube. It consists of a missing
horizontal slice in a single vertical rib.
76
- 40
I
~~~sa~~
structures are made simply by drilling three sets of holes 35.260 off vertical into the ( 111)
top face.
Since we could design the structure at will, donor defects were chosen to consist of
a single dielectric sphere centered in an air atom. Likewise, by breaking one of the
interconnecting ribs, it is easy to create acceptor modes. We selected an acceptor defect as
shown in Fig. 1, centered in the unit cube. It comprises a vertical rib which has a missing
horizontal slice.
The heart of our experimental apparatus is a photonic crystal embedded in
microwave absorbing pads as shown in Fig. 2. The photonic crystals were 8-10 atomic
layers thick in the (111) direction. The cubic unit-cell length was a = 11 mm and the hole
diameter was 5.16 mm, leaving an empty volume fraction -78%. Monopole antennas,
consisting of 6-mm pins, coupled radiation to the defect mode. The HP 8510 Network
Analyzer was set up to measure transmission between the antennas. Figure 3(a) shows the
transmission amplitude in the absence of a defect. There is very strong attenuation (-10-5)
between 13 and 16 GHz marking the valence- and conduction-band edges of the forbidden
gap. This is a tribute to both the dynamic range of the network analyzer, and the sizable
imaginary wave vector in the forbidden gap.
A transmission spectrum in the presence of an acceptor defect is shown in Fig.
3(b). Most of the spectrum is unaffected, except at the electromagnetic frequency marked
"deep acceptor" within the forbidden gap. At that precise frequency, radiation "hops" from
the transmitting antenna to the acceptor mode and then to the receiving antenna. The
acceptor level frequency, within the forbidden gap, is dependent on the volume of material
removed. Figure 4 shows the acceptor level frequency as a function of defect volume
removed from one unit cell. When a relatively large volume of material is removed, the
acceptor level is deep, as shown in Fig. 3(b). A smaller amount of material removed
results in a shallow acceptor level, nearer the valence band. If the removed material volume
77
ABSORE
CRYSTAL
FIG. 2. Experimental configuration for the detection of local
electromagnetic modes in the vicinity of a lattice defect. Transmission
amplitude attenuation from one antenna to the other is measured. At the
local mode frequency the signal hops by means of the local mode in the
center of the photonic crystal producing a local transmission peak. The
signal propagates in the (111) direction through 8-10 atomic layers.
78
10-1
.o 102
co
_ 0-3
10-4
1 n-5
10- 1
.o 10-2
. 1 0-3
10- 4
10 - 5
1
.° 10-2
C
. 10-3
10-4
10-5
(a)
(b)
(C)
11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Frequency in GHz
FIG. 3. (a) Transmission attenuation through a defect-free photonic crystal,
as a function of microwave frequency. The forbidden gap falls between 13
and 16 GHz. (b) Attenuation through a photonic crystal with a single
acceptor in the center. The large acceptor volume moved its frequency near
midgap. The electromagnetic resonator Q was -1000, limited only by the
loss tangent of the dielectric material. (c) Attenuation through a photonic
crystal with a single donor defect, an uncentered dielectric sphere, leading to
two shallow donor modes.
79
1
!UCTION BAND EDGE
o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~TR 0N BA -6E dE---o /~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0
0
0
-0
0
0
VALENCE BAND EDGE
I- _ _ _ _ _ -_ _ _ _ -_ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - -
0o o ACCEPTOR MODE
* DONOR MODE
(DOUBLY DEGENERATE)
2 3 4 5
DEFECT VOLUME (IN UNITS OF I ), /2n 3)
FIG. 4. Donor and acceptor mode frequencies as a function of normalized
donor and acceptor defect volume. The points are experimental and the
corresponding lines are calculated. Defect volume is normalized to (/2n) 3 ,
where is the midgap vacuum wavelength and n is the refractive index. A
finite defect volume is required to bind a mode in the forbidden gap.
80
0.60
0
a
._c
C
z3L
0
U-cc
LL
0.55
0.50 o 
: _.
z
uJ
0
co
0
LL
n4A I_ __ __ _~~~~~
6 7
I 1
V.__
1 I I I
1
falls below a threshold volume, the acceptor level falls within the continuum of levels
below the top of the valence band, becoming metastable.
On an expanded frequency scale we can measure the resonator Q of the deep
acceptor mode, which is Q-1000, as limited by the loss tangent of the Emerson & Cuming
Stycast material of which the photonic crystal was made.
The behavior of an off-center donor defect is shown in Fig. 3(c). In that case the
donor volume was slightly above the required threshold for forming bound donor modes.
Already two shallow donor modes can be seen in Fig. 3(c). When the donor is centered in
the Wigner-Seitz unit cell, the two modes merge to form doubly degenerate donor modes as
in Fig. 4. Single donor defects seem to produce multiple donor levels. Figure 4 gives the
donor level frequency as a function of donor volume. As in the case of acceptors, there is a
threshold defect volume required for the creation of bound modes below the conduction-
band edge. However, the threshold volume for donor defects is almost 10 times larger
than the acceptor threshold volume. Apparently this is due to the electric-field
concentration in the dielectric ribs at the top of the valence band. Bloch wave functions at
the top of the valence band are rather easily disrupted by the missing rib segment.
We have chosen in Fig. 4 to normalize the defect volume to a natural volume of the
physical system, (/2n) 3, which is basically a cubic half wavelength in the dielectric
medium. More specifically, X is the vacuum wavelength at the midgap frequency, and n is
the refractive index of the dielectric medium. Since we are measuring a dielectric volume, it
makes sense to normalize to a half-wavelength cube as measured at the dielectric refractive
index. Based on the reasonable scaling of Fig. 4, our choice of volume normalization
would seem justified. (Experimentally, the odd-shaped defect volumes were measured by
weighing the samples.)
It is interesting to compare our local modes to those of a one-dimensional Fabry-
Perot resonator, constructed in the usual manner of quarter-wave multilayer dielectric
mirrors. In such a resonator the mirrors face each other and are usually separated by an
81
integral number of half wavelengths. The net effect of the left and right mirrors facing each
other is that they combine to form a monolithic ID periodic dielectric structure, but with a
quarter wavelength of phase slip introduced into the very center. This same quarter
wavelength of phase slip is often employed in distributed feedback lasers7, effectively
converting them into Fabry-Perot resonators. The standing-wave mode is sometimes8
regarded as a bound state split off into the D band gap and localized to the quarter-wave
defect in the periodic structure. In one dimension, however, nothing requires that the
defect be one-quarter wavelength long. A phase slip, no matter how small, allows a bound
mode to form in the forbidden gap, usually near a band edge. This is in distinction to Fig.
4 where a finite-sized defect volume is required to bind a mode.
This is similar to the comparison between D and 3D quantum mechanics. In one
dimension even an infinitesimal quantum well will bind9 a state. In three dimensions, a
finite-depth potential well is required to produce9 a bound state. Figure 4 is telling us flat
the same requirement for a finite defect volume applies to 3D confined photon modes.
John and Wang l o have shown that the requirement for a finite-volume-integrated
polarizability can be satisfied even by a single resonant atom if undamped by nonradiative
decay. Then an individual atom is capable of binding a local electromagnetic mode at its
resonant transition frequency. They call this a photon-atom bound state. Inhibited
spontaneous emission is accompanied with strong self-dressing of the atom by its own
localized radiation fields, leading to anomalous Lamb shifts.
We have also performed calculations of the frequency spectrum of these dielectric
systems. In order to solve for the electromagnetic modes, we expand Maxwell's equations
in plane waves, employing the techniques of Ho, Chan, and Soukoulis3. We employ the
7 H. Kogelnik and C. V. Shank, J. Appl. Phys. 43, 2328 (1972).
8 H. A. Haus and C. V. Shank, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 12, 532 (1976); S. L McCall and P. M.
Platzman, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 21, 1899 (1985).
9 L. I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1949), see pp. 37 and 77.
10S. John and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2418 (1990).
82
supercell method, placing one defect in a repeated cell of dielectric material. Our
calculations were performed in supercells containing eight fcc Wigner-Seitz cells, and we
have performed tests on larger supercells containing eight conventional fcc cubic unit cells
(32 Wigner-Seitz cells). Because the distance between defects is relatively small, there is
significant overlap between the localized modes on neighboring defects. This overlap
manifests itself as a dispersion of the impurity band, and the frequency of the bound state is
taken to be the band center. We expanded the H(r) magnetic field in a basis of 4000 plane
waves, and the lowest eigenvalues were obtained by the Natarajan and Vanderbilt 1
iterative diagonalization technique.
The solid lines in Fig. 4 show good qualitative agreement with the experimental
points. The discrepancy between theory and experiment is larger for defects in supercells
than for purely bulk systems, where better than 1% agreement has been achieved. There
are two important reasons for this larger discrepancy. First, because of the larger unit-cell
size, it is necessary to work at a lower plane-wave cutoff. Second is the small number of
primitive unit cehll used in the supercell approximations. As in Ref. 5, the dispersion of
the impurity band is quite large in the eight-atom supercell, -(20-80)% of the gap width for
various states. Increasing the supercell to 32 atoms reduces the bandwidth by 80%.
The extension of these 3D dielectric resonators to laser wavelengths is marked by
the following considerations. The refractive index we have chosen to work with (n = 3.6)
is a good match to the common semiconductors of which lasers are made. Furthermore,
the fcc geometry we are using has begun6 to be microfabricated in GaAs. Such
microresonators will be particularly valuable for making tiny low-threshold lasers. But
their value is greatly increased if the photonic band gap inhibits spontaneous emission. In a
semiconductor laser, this would lead to near unity quantum efficiency into the lasing mode.
Photon number state squeezing 12 into that mode would be greatly enhanced. Inhibited
llR. Natarajan and D. Vanderbilt, J. Comput. Phys. 81, 218 (1989).
12 y. Yamamoto and S. Machida, Phys. Rev. A 35, 5114 (1987).
83
spontaneous emission requires that the broad semiconductor luminescence band should be
centered within the forbidden gap. In semiconductor lasers, population inversion and gain
first appear at the red edge of the luminescence band, i.e., nearer to the valence band. This
suggests that acceptor modes would be the appropriate type for lasers.
The other advantage for acceptor-mode laser cavities is associated with our acceptor
defect geometry. The vertical rib with a missing horizontal slice, as in Fig. 1, can be
readily microfabricated. It should be possible to create it in III-V materials by growing an
aluminum-rich epitaxial layer and lithographically patterning it down to a single dot the size
of one of the vertical ribs. After regrowth of the original ml-V composition and reactive ion
etching of the photonic crystal, HF acid etching, whose1 3 selectivity > 108, will be used to
remove the Al-rich horizontal slice from the one rib containing such a layer. The resonant
frequency of the microcavity can be controlled by the thickness of the Al-rich sacrificial
layer.
We would like to thank John Gural for his skillful machining of the photonic
crystals. The work at M. I. T. was partially supported by ONR Contract No. N00014-86-
K-0158 and U. S. JSEP Contract No. DAAL-03-86-K-0002. R. D. M. acknowledges
valuable discussions with K. M. Ho.
1 3E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, J. P Harbison, and R. Bhat, Appl. Phys. Let. 51, 2222 (1987).
84
Chapter 7: The Existence of a Photonic Band Gap in Two Dimensions
in collaboration with
R. D. Meade and K. D. Brommer
85
Since the first suggestion that a dielectric material with three-dimensional periodicity
could reflect light incident from any direction, there has been rapid progress in the newly
emergent field of photonic band gap materialsl 12 3 4 56 .7 8 .9. Several structures which
exhibit a photonic band gap have been discovered5 ,6 and a number of important properties
of these materials, such as the localization of light at defects7 8 and surfaces9, have been
discussed. The related problem of dielectric crystals which have a two-dimensional
periodicity in the -9 plane and are continuous in the £ direction is also beginning to receive
some attentionlO, 11.1 2,13.
In previous work, l °0 1 1 dielectric structures which had band gaps for individual
polarizations were found. In this paper, we present a two-dimensional structure in which
these band gaps overlap to form a complete gap which prevents the in-plane propagation of
light of any polarization. We first employ theoretical calculations to discover such a system
and then perform microwave transmission experiments to verify that light of any
polarization cannot propagate in this structure. While this work concentrates on the
propagation of light in the two-dimensional plane, we conclude this paper by discussing the
out-of-plane photonic band structure.
In a two-dimensional photonic crystal, like its three-dimensional counterpart, the
light propagates as Bloch waves,
1E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).
2 E. Yablonovitch and T. J. Gmitter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1950 (1989).
3K. M. Leung and Y. F. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2646 (1990).
4Ze Zhang and Sashi Satpathy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2650 (1990).
5 K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan, and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3152 (1990).
6 E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, and K. M. Leung, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 2295 (1991).
7 R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 44, 13772 (1991).
8 E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 3380 (1991).
9R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev B. 44, 10961 (1991).
10 M. Plihal, A. Shambrook, A. A. Maradudin, P. Sheng, Optics Communications 80, 199 (1991).
1 1 M. Plihal and A. A. Maradudin, Phys. Rev. B 44, 8586 (1991).
12S. L. McCall, P. M. Platzman, R. Dalichaouch, D. Smith, and S. Schultz, Phys. Rev Lett. 67, 2017
(1991).
1 3W. Robertson, G. Arjavalingam, R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2023 (1992).
86
H(r) = u(r) eikr . (1)
To understand this propagation let us consider the reciprocal space of a two-dimensional
system. Since the crystal has discrete translational symmetry in the A-9 plane, there is a
finite in-plane Brillouin zone described by in-plane wave vectors kl and k2 with -G1/2 < kl
< G 1/2 and -G2 /2 < k2 < G2/2, where G1 and G2 are the reciprocal lattice vectors. In the Z
direction, however, the system is continuous and so the wave vector can assume any value
-oo < k < . Since the system has no index contrast in the 2 direction, a wave traveling in
this direction is not scattered. Thus, we argue on physical grounds that there cannot be a
band gap for light propagating in the z direction with kl = k2 = 0. In the first part of this
paper, we will restrict our attention to the in-plane band structure kz = 0. With this
assumption, we can take advantage of the mirror symmetry to restrict the fields as either
odd or even under Mz. Thus we can catalogue the electromagnetic modes as one of two
types, either (Ha, Hy, Ez) or (E, Ey, Hz) which we will refer to as E perpendicular to the
plane or E parallel to the plane respectively.
In order to calculate the electromagnetic frequency spectrum of these dielectric
lattices, we have employed the computational techniques described in references 3-5.
Briefly, the macroscopic Maxwell's equations can be rearranged to yield the eigenvalue
equation
V x V x H = H. (2)
The magnetic field H(r) can be expressed as a sum of plane waves,
H(r) = A hG,, t& ei(k+G)r, (3)
G =112
87
where k is in the Brillouin zone, G is summed over the reciprocal lattice, and ex are
polarizations orthogonal to (k+G). By limiting the size of wave vector included in this
plane-wave expansion, a finite sum is achieved. The eigenvalue equation is now be
expressed in matrix form,
HG,G' hG = o2 h(4)
where c = 1 and
-1 (C~2.92 ' C 2-AI '
H GG' =k + GI k + G'I EGG ( 2z 1'J (5)
-1
and G,C is the Fourier transform of the dielectric function e(r). This eigenvalue equation
can now solved by standard numerical techniques yielding the normal mode coefficients
and frequencies of the electromagnetic modes. Because of the two-dimensional nature of
the problems considered, plane-wave convergence was achieved with a relatively small
number of plane waves and we estimate that by including 140 plane waves per
polarization the electromagnetic mode frequencies were obtained to better than 1%. This
technique provides a simple and powerful method to solve problems in electrodynamics
which takes full account of the vector nature of the electromagnetic radiation.
As in the three-dimensional case, our primary objective is to create a dielectric
system which exhibits a complete photonic band gap, a set of frequencies in which light of
any polarization cannot propagate in any in-plane direction. In order to find such a
structure we searched all filling fractions of square, triangular and honeycomb lattices. We
also considered dielectric rods in air, as well as air columns drilled in dielectric. At the
dielectric contrast of GaAs ( = 13), the only combination which was found to have a
photonic band gap in both polarizations was the triangular lattice of air columns in dielectric
(see Fig. 1). The maximum band gap we find is OGap/0Midgap = 18.6%, which occurs
88
Photonic Band Structure of
Triangular Lattice of Air Colunms
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
M
FIG. 1. Frequencies of the lowest photonic bands for a triangular lattice of
air columns (eair= 1) drilled in dielectric (Ed= 13). The band structure is
plotted along special directions of the in-plane Brillouin zone (kz = 0), as
shown in the lower inset. The radius of the air columns is r = 0.48 a,
where a is the in-plane lattice constant. The solid(dashed) lines show the
frequencies of bands which have the electric field parallel(perpendicular) to
the plane. Notice the photonic band gap between the third and fourth
bands.
89
I-
C-2
Gt:
eW
when the radius of the air columns was rMax = 0.48 a, where a is the in-plane lattice
constant. A gap appears in this structure for dielectric contrast of 7.2 or greater (see Fig.
2). This photonic band gap is somewhat unusual because it occurs between the third and
fourth bands, whereas the photonic band gaps in three-dimensional structures have always
occurred between the second and third bands.
We verified our theoretical predictions by constructing a two-dimensional photonic
band gap material from a dielectric block and measuring its transmissivity. We fabricated
the sample from a piece of C-Stock 265 manufactured by Cuming Corp. This material
consists of glass spheres and aluminum flake mixed in a binder to give an artificial
dielectric with a constant Ea -13-15 (we assume £ = 13). This material was chosen because
it was inexpensive and easy to machine. Using a numerically-controlled drill, the sample
could be constructed in about four hours. An 8x14 array of air columns of diameter 0.992
cm were drilled in a triangular lattice with lattice constant 1.044 cm and so r/a = 0.475,
close to the optimal theoretical ratio. Based on our calculations, we expected a gap in the
range 12.3-14.6 GHz.
We performed free-space transmission measurements at an antenna test range. We
mounted the photonic band-gap material inside a 7.5 by 15 cm aperture cut into a 90 by 90
cm sheet of radar absorbing material. A broad band horn antenna illuminated the sample at
a range of 5.5 m. The 3 dB beam width of the radiated pattern was 60 cm at this range,
ensuring flat, plane-wave illumination across the full extent of the sample. A notch antenna
mounted directly behind the sample received the transmitted signal. An HP8510 network
analyzer measured the power transmitted between the antennas. We used a chirped
waveform along with digital range gating to eliminate extraneous reflections from objects
near the sample. The sensitivity of our system was measured at 70 dB. This level of
dynamic range enabled us to study detailed structure inside the photonic band gap,
especially to compare the transmitted power of different photonic band gaps. Transmission
amplitude was measured from 2 to 18 GHz at different sample orientations as the sample
90
Maximum Gap Size and Optimal Radius
40%
a 30%
3
a
a
co 20%
E
10%
0%
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
5 10 15 20
Dielectric Contrast
FIG. 2. The maximum photonic band gap achievable for different dielectric
contrast (solid line), and the optimal radius for which the maximum band
gap is achieved (dashed line). The band gap is expressed as a percentage of
the midgap frequency, and the radius in units of the lattice constant. Note
that the band gap first appears at a dielectric contrast of 7.2.
91
was rotated on an antenna pedestal. Both polarizations were studied by rotating the
antennas. Two separate pairs of antennas were required to cover the entire 2 to 18 GHz
range.
In Fig. 3, we display the experimental transmission spectrum T(o,k//) and the
calculated band structure of our two-dimensional structure. Note that there is no
transmission for either polarization in the electromagnetic band gap, between 13-15.5 GHz.
We anticipate if there are electromagnetic modes at (ok//), then the light will travel through
the sample and the transmission T(c,k//) will be large. On the other hand, if the density of
states is zero at (cok //), then the light will decay into the sample and T(co,k//) will be greatly
reduced. These expectations are fulfilled in Fig. 3(a), which shows the transmission
spectrum for light which is polarized with electric field normal to the plane. As we can see
in this figure, the transmission is large (light regions) in the area where there are traveling
modes (shaded by vertical lines). In the gap, however, the fields are strongly attenuated
(dark regions) with transmission dropping by five orders of magnitude.
Figure 3(b) shows the transmission spectrum for light which is polarized with
electric field perpendicular the plane. This polarization has two gaps, a complete gap at 13
GHz, and a mini gap at 8.5 GHz. The attenuation is small for the mini gap, with the
transmission dropping by only 20 dB. The complete gap begins at 12.5 GHz, as we
expect theoretically, and the attenuation remains large (-50 dB) until 18 GHz, which is the
limit of our experimental resolution. However, we expect theoretically that the material
should transmit light via the band centered at 16 GHz. Although this seems puzzling, it is
quite similar to the results of Robertson et al.13 These authors found that symmetry
constraints prevented certain bands from transmitting light which was incident as a plane
wave.
Until this point, we have considered only the case in which light propagates in the
two-dimensional plane (k = 0). However, for some applications it is important to
understand the out-of-plane band structure, shown in Fig. 4. The inset to this figure
92
(a) Tsmissioll Spectrum Ib l E--icld // to 2d Plane
0.00 100' !1:i:1 lt 
o~~bo !~
P2alleI Wavevector (ki)
Transmission Spectrum for E-Field I to 2d plane
]Gf" 2 7'i k .. .
Jo . . I C uansmussion spectrum o our two-dimensional structure forlight polarized with electric field parallel to the 2D plane (a) andperpendicular to the 2D plane (b). The transmission amplitude T(o,k//) isplotted for different frequencies and parallel wave vectors. The attenuationis displayed in grayscale, with the light regions representing largetransmission and the dark regions representing large attenuation. Variationsin the attenuation are due to reflection, not absorption. Note that there is notransmission for either polarization in the electromagnetic band gap,between 13-16 GHz. Because the sample was illuminated along the (01)face (see Fig. 2, inset), the parallel wave vector refers to variation in the(10) direction. The vertical lines in the figure designate the regions of(co,k//) in which calculations find electromagnetic modes. These modesmay have any wave vector along the (01) direction, but have k = 0.
93
16 (1
VI 2.00
E! ?O
... - -
~.ii 
~i
(b)
3.00
l
2.00
IIIYYFEM
shows the frequency dependence of the lowest band as kz is varied. When kz = 0, this
lowest band spans a broad range of frequencies (see Fig. 1). However, in the inset to Fig.
4 we see that as kz increases the lowest band becomes flat and so the in-plane bandwidth
tends to zero. Figure 4 also plots the frequency of the lowest six bands as kz is varied. It
shows both o(f,kz) and (K,kz), corresponding to the frequency change of the bands
which start at F and K respectively. Clearly, as kz increases the bandwidth of each of the
photonic bands tends towards zero.
Thus, the primary feature of the out-of-plane band structure is that as kz increases,
the in-plane bandwidth tends to zero. We can understand this simply. For large kz, the
light is totally internally reflected inside the dielectric regions, just as in an optical
waveguide. Because there is very little overlap between light trapped in neighboring
dielectric waveguides, the modes are decoupled and so is the bandwidth tends to zero.
This is especially true for modes which have o << c kz. Recall that in the vacuum region,
light obeys the wave equation
02
V2H = -2 H. (6)
If the fields oscillate along the z axis as
H(r) = u(x,y) eikz, (7)
then the wave equation reduces to
Vu = kz 2 ) e ()
Thus, if o << c kz then the fields are strongly exponentially decaying in the vacuum
region, and so the overlap between modes in neighboring regions of dielectric vanishes,
94
The Out-of-Plane Band Structure
1.5
3
c-.
U
W. 0.5
0
0 1 2 3 4 5
Perpendicular Wavevector (ka/2t)
FIG. 4. The out-of-plane band structure of the triangular lattice of aircolumns. The frequencies of the lowest six bands are shown versus k.
The frequencies of the bands which start at , o(f',k), are plotted using
solid lines, whereas the frequencies of the bands which start at K, o)(K,kz),
are plotted using dashed-dotted lines. The thick(thin) lines correspond to
doubly(singly) degenerate modes. The straight line co = c kz separates the
regions in which the modes are oscillatory (o > c kz) in the air regions from
those which are evanescent ( < c kz) in the air regions. The inset to this
figure shows the frequency dependence of the lowest band as k is varied.
Note that as kz increases the lowest band becomes flat.
95
and the bandwidth goes to zero. The bands in Fig. 4 display this behavior. Above the
light cone co > c kz, the bands have a large dispersion, while for co << c kz this bandwidth
goes to zero.
Experiments were funded by Lockheed Sanders. We thank R. Gilbert and H.
Mullaney for helpful discussion and D. Larochelle for assisting in designing the
experiment. Partial support for this work was provided by the Office of Naval Research
Contract No. N00014-86-K-0158. Finally, one of us (A. M. R. ) would like to
acknowledge the support of the Joint Services Electronics Program.
Addendum: Since submission, another group4 has reported the existence of a band
gap common to both polarizations for a square lattice of air columns in dielectric. This
band gap is appreciable at large index contrast and vanishes at c = 12.3.
14 p. Villeneuve and M. Piche, submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.
96
Chapter 8: Measurement of Photonic Band Structure in a Two-
Dimensional Periodic Dielectric Array
in collaboration with
W. M. Robertson, G. Arjavalingam, R. D. Meade, and K. D. Brommer
97
The propagation of electromagnetic radiation in periodic dielectric structures has
received much recent experimental and theoretical attention. The existence in such
structures of photonic band gaps--frequency intervals in which no photon modes are
allowed--leads to a variety of phenomena of both fundamentall,2 and practical interest3 4 .
Theoretical calculations of the dispersion relations for propagation in both three-
dimensional 5 ,6,7 and two-dimensional 8,9 dielectric structures using the plane-wave
expansion have become relatively sophisticated. Experimentally, investigations of photonic
band-structure phenomena have been confined to measurements at microwave frequencies
because of difficulties in fabricating ordered dielectric arrays of optical length scales.
Although microwave experiments have been used to determine the frequencies which
define photonic band gaps l' l1 1, and to perform elegant explorations of localized defect
modes 112, these techniques have not been used to measure the dispersion of radiation at
frequencies away from the gaps. Measurement of the photonic dispersion relation over a
broad frequency range would provide a direct test of the theoretical formalisms, and would
also elucidate the transition in propagation from long wavelengths, where the dielectric
array behaves as an effective medium, to shorter wavelengths where strong scattering leads
to dispersion and the opening of photonic band gaps.
In this letter we investigate the dispersion relation for electromagnetic wave
propagation in a periodic dielectric array using the recently developed coherent microwave
1G. Kurizki and A. Z. Genack, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2269 (1988).
2S. John and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2418 (1990).
3 E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).
4 R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 44, 13772 (1991).
5 K. M. Leung and Y. F. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2646 (1990).
6Ze Zhang and Sashi Satpathy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2650 (1990).
7K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan, and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3152 (1990).
8R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos (to be published).
9M. Plihal, A. Shambrook, A. A. Maradudin, and P. Sheng, Opt. Commun. 80, 199 (1991).
10E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, and K. M. Leung, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 2295 (1991).
11S. L. McCall, P. M. Platzman, R. Dalichaouch, D. Smith, and S. Schultz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 2017
(1991).
12E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, R. D. Meade, A. M. Rappe, K. D. Brommer, and J. D. Joannopoulos,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3380 (1991).
98
transient spectroscopy (COMITS) technique 13 ,14. COMITS is based on the radiation and
detection of picosecond-duration electromagnetic transients with optoelectronically pulsed
antennas. It is capable of free-space microwave and millimeter wave measurements over a
broad frequency range (15-140 GHz) with good (60:1) polarization sensitivity 15'16 . In
particular, the phase sensitivity of the COMITS technique is used to directly measure the
dispersion relation in a two-dimensional photonic crystal across the fundamental and higher
band gaps. The experimental results are compared to theoretical predictions obtained with
the plane-. .ve expansion method, which has been described elsewhere7 . In brief, the
macroscopic Maxwell's equations are expressed as an eigenvalue equation in reciprocal
space and the resulting matrix is then diagonalized to yield the mode frequencies and field
patterns. This technique is a simple and powerful method to solve problems in
electrodynamics which takes full account of the vector nature of the electromagnetic
radiation.
Although there is much interest in three-dimensional photonic crystals, i.e.,
structures for which there is a photonic band gap in all propagation directions, in these
experiments we chose to study a two-dimensional dielectric structure consisting of alumina-
ceramic cylinders arranged in a square array. The primary reason for this choice is that the
two-dimensional structures are easier to fabricate. However, the COMITS technique is
capable of measuring the dispersion relation in three-dimensional systems as well. The
results of reference 9 were used to determine the optimal choices for cylinder diameter and
lattice spacing so that photonic band gaps appear in the experimentally accessible frequency
range (15-140 GHz). For the measurements presented here, 0.74 + 0.03-mm-diameter
100-mm-long alumina-ceramic rods were arranged with a 1.87-mm lattice constant in a
13 y. Pastol, G. Arjavalingam, J.-M. Halbout, and G. V. Kopcsay, Electron. Lett. 25, 523 (1989).
14 G. Arjavalingam, Y. Pastol, J.-M. Halbout, and G. V. Kopcsay, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech.
38, 615 (1990).
15 y. Pastol, G. Arjavalingam, G. V. Kopcsay, and J.-M. Halbout, Appl. Phys. Lett. 55, 2277 (1989).
16 G. Arjavalingam, N. Theophilou, Y. Pastol, G. V. Kopcsay, and M. Angelopoulos, J. Chem. Phys. 93,
6 (1990).
99
square array. Alumina was chosen because it has a large dielectric constant and low
dielectric loss over the microwave and millimeter-wave spectruml3 . The COMITS
experimental setup is shown schematically in Fig. 1. The transmitting and receiving
elements are exponentially tapered, coplanar strip antennas fabricated photolithographically
on silicon-on-sapphire.14 The silicon epilayer is subsequently ion implanted to reduce the
carrier lifetime to less than 1 ps. Ultrafast optical pulses from a mode-locked, pulse-
compressed, and frequency-doubled Nd-doped yttrium-lithium-fluoride laser are arranged
in a conventional pump-probe configuration. The 527-nm wavelength pulses are -1.5 ps
wide and have a repetition rate of 240 MHz. A short current pulse is generated on the dc-
biased transmitter by the pump beam. This pulse propagates down the coplanar strip line,
spreading in time to about 7 ps, and is radiated into free space by the exponentially tapered
flare. Hemispherical-fused silica lenses are used to collimate the transient radiation from
the transmitter and to focus it, after passing through the sample, onto the receiver 4 . The
voltage induced on the receiver is measured, by photoconductive sampling, as a function of
the time delay between the pump and probe pulses 14 . Signal averaging is performed by
adding ~1000 scans with a rapid-scan delay line.
To measure the transmission properties of a dielectric array, the sample is placed in
the beam path so that the transient radiation propagates in a plane perpendicular to the axis
of the cylinders. The cylinders forming the array were fixed in a machined holder so that
the orientation of the sample, with respect to the direction of propagation, could be
adjusted. Also, the number of rows in the array can be changed easily. The transverse
dimensions of the array were always made larger than the collimated beam size (-3 cm) so
that there were no end effects1 4 . By suitably rotating the sample we could make
measurements with polarization either parallel or perpendicular to the axis of the
cylindersl 5 16. By symmetry, waves incident on the rods with polarization either parallel
or perpendicular to the rod axis will preserve this polarization.
100
C
C
C
-IA13r.
7
-.I
IIn
U, , _ I_ _ _ _ _ _
D -I- _ _ _ _ _m -- - -X > r r r tr - - - - !
- ~~~~~~r 
1
I
I
I1
o
J
0:1
Z C
IcI
m 
FIG. 1. Experimental setup for coherent microwave transient spectroscopy
measurements. The two-dimensional photonic crystal is made of 0.74-mm-
diam 100-mm-long alumina-ceramic rods arranged in a square array with a
1.87-mm lattice constant.
101
V
Time-domain wave forms are recorded first without and then with the sample in the
beam path. The amplitude spectrum of the former, obtained by a numerical Fourier
transfornn, is shown as the dashed lines in Fig. 2. Clearly, the pulse contains usable
frequency components in the 15-140 GHz frequency range. Because the measured signal
is proportional to the time-dependent voltage induced on the receiving antenna, phase
information (not shown) is preserved. As we describe below, this phase sensitivity is
crucial in determining the dispersion relation for electromagnetic wave propagation in the
photonic crystal. The amplitude spectrum of the measured wave form, with the E field
parallel to the axis of the ceramic rods is shown as the solid line in Fig. 2(a). The
corresponding spectrum with E field perpendicular to the axis of the rods is depicted in
Fig. 2(b). For both measurements the sample was 7 rows of rods deep in the direction of
propagation and 25 columns wide transverse to it. Propagation was along the (10) axis of
the lattice. Figure 2(a) clearly indicates the existence of a band gap between 45 and 70
GHz, and the suggestion of other gaps at about 100 and 125 GHz. Very narrow band gaps
are not clearly resolved because our frequency resolution is limited to 5 GHz by the 200-ps
window of the temporal data14. The results presented above are consistent with previous
experimental measurements on two-dimensional photonic crystals l1 .
Although the amplitude spectrum alone gives an indication of the gaps, it is much
more instructive to analyze the phase data to determine the effective refractive index of the
photonic crystal and, thus, to determine the full dispersion relation. The complex
transmission function of the dielectric array is calculated by dividing the complex Fourier
transform of the wave form with the sample by the complex Fourier transform of the
reference wave form without a sample. This transmission function contains both the
amplitude and phase information, and represents the electromagnetic propagation properties
of the photonic crystal. Using the known thickness of the dielectric array L and the net
phase difference 0, the effective microwave refractive index, n(f) can be calculated at each
frequencyl 4:
102
AMPLITUDE SPECTRUM (arb. units)
C1
-n
:0
c
m
0
-<
01
ON
C0
01
CD
01
FIG. 2. Amplitude spectra obtained by a numerical Fourier transform of
experimentally measured time-domain data. The dashed line represents the
reference amplitude spectra obtained with no sample in the beam. Solid
circles represent the amplitude spectra transmitted through seven rows of
rods with propagation along the (10) direction with E field of the transient
radiation polarized (a) parallel and (b) perpendicular to the axis of the rods.
103
I I I I
_
/
I- - I iEl
X _-~~~~~c
N o'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
n(f) = (c/2ir Lf) + 1, (1)
where c is the velocity of light. Using the effective index values, the dispersion relation, f
vs. k, can be calculated directly with
k = (2ir f/c) n(f) . (2)
The measured dispersion relation for propagation along the (10) direction with the
E field polarized parallel to the rods is plotted as the solid circles in Fig. 3(a). Overlaid on
the measured data are the theoretical predictions (dashed lines) calculated using the plane-
wave expansion technique. The agreement between the measured data and the theoretical
calculation is generally excellent. In Fig. 3(b) we show the dispersion relation for
propagation along the (10) direction but with the polarization rotated such that the E field is
perpendicular to the axis of the cylinders. The solid squares in the figure are the
experimentally measured values and the dashed lines predictions of theory. Again, the
agreement between theory and experiment is excellent. For both polarizations photonic
band gaps appear, as expected, at the Brillouin zone boundaries. Although the theory
predicts that small gaps open at higher frequencies, as mentioned above, the resolution of
the COMITS technique is insufficient to fully resolve them. However, in the amplitude
spectra of Fig. 2 there are dips at these points reflecting a strong suppression in the density
of states. It should be noted in Fig. 3(b) that there is a large jump in wave vector (i.e., a
large phase change) between band 2 and band 3 resulting in an ambiguity in the correct
value for the phase, and hence in the correct form of the dispersion relation. This
ambiguity can generally be resolved by determining the transmission function due to a
single row of rods, accomplished by comparing the transmission through two photonic
crystals whose thicknesses differ by one row of rods.
104
-4--
- --- -,-BAND 5
BAND 4 _ _- ----- a- - -] BAND 3
-- __. BAND 2
BAND I _ - - - -
(a)
16.84.2 8.4 12.6
WAVEVECTOR (cm-1)
FIG. 3. Dispersion relation for propagation of electromagnetic waves along
the (10) direction of a two-dimensional photonic crystal with polarization (a)
parallel and (b) perpendicular to the rod axis. The solid symbols are the
experimentally determined values and the dashed lines are the predictions of
theory.
105
150
125
100
75
50
rJ
LU
ctU
Mr
25
0
150
125
I i ,
BAND 4
*…
---,- _BAND 3
BAND 2
BAND I ,'s
(b)I I '
100
75
50
25
Nv
0..0
_
I
--f = = K -
-f W- 
!
The theoretical calculations also predict the existence of band which is not seen
experimentally, band 3 in Fig. 3(a). Considering the excellent agreement between theory
and experiment for the other modes, this result is rather surprising. However, an
examination of the field patterns for these bands reveals that a planar wave front (as in our
experiment) cannot excite these modes. The reason is as follows. In our experiment we
measure the band structure along the (10) direction, which is a special direction of the
Brillouin zone. Physically, this means that the fields must be either even or odd upon
reflection through the mirror plane shown in Fig. 4. As this figure shows, the fields for
band 3 are odd under reflection through this mirror plane. However, an incoming plane
wave with electric field oriented along the rod axis is even with respect to this reflection,
and so it cannot excite the mode of band 3. In fact, all of the modes which are seen
experimentally are even under this reflection, and all the modes which are predicted but not
found are odd. Symmetry plays an analogous role for radiation of the other polarization.
Our calculations show that the lowest three bands in Fig. 3(b) are symmetry allowed and
we find experimentally that all three are observed. Theoretically, we predict that band 4 of
Fig. 3(b) is symmetry forbidden and we do not observe this band in our experiment. It is
possible that we do not observe this band because of the high-frequency limitations of our
experiment. Thus, we believe that the missing modes in Fig. 3 do exist in the crystal, but
that they do not transmit electromagnetic radiation in this specific experiment.
At long wavelengths, i.e., for frequencies well below the fundamental gap, the
dielectric response of the two-dimensional array is well described by effective-medium
theory. The orthogonal orientations of the polarization with respect to the two-dimensional
array of cylinders correspond precisely to the configurations considered in effective-
medium theory for the limiting cases of maximum (E field parallel to all interfaces) and
106
a 
BAND I
MIRROR PLANE
0 
BAND 2
BAND 2
_-+ +_
-+ +- 
Sp y >
FIG. 4. The symmetry of the electric fields associated with the lowest four
photonic bands. For these modes, the electric-field lines run parallel to the
rod axis, and so the +(-) signs indicate regions in which the electric field is
oriented into (out of) the page. The states depicted lie at the Brillouin zone
edge and so the fields alternate sign in neighboring lateral unit cells. The
shaded circles (not shown to scale) indicate the square lattice of dielectric
rods. The modes along the (10) direction must be even (bands 1,2, and 4)
or odd (band 3) with respect to reflection in the mirror plane, shown as the
dashed line.
107
BAND 3
+ +- 
+ +
+ -
BAND 4
+"0- -0+ +---
+ 
+
'"'""0"'"©- -Q': -''"
®
®
"';' '
"'"
;;-···
"''
"''`'
-·-·- ·-:j. i
-__ T-N
IMr -
4.-iN
minimum (E field perpendicular to all interfaces) screening17. The dielectric constants for
these two situations are given by
E = fl£l + f2e 2 (3)
1/£ = fl/E 1 + f2/£2, (4)
where fl and f2 are the volume filling fractions occupied by the two media with dielectric
constants c1 and E2, respectively. For our two-dimensional array of alumina cylinders ( 1
= 8.9) these expressions predict microwave refractive indices of 1.41 and 1.06 for E field
parallel and perpendicular to the cylinders respectively. Experimentally the lowest-
frequency (long-wavelength) refractive index values are 1.47 and 1.11.
In summary, we have investigated the photonic band structure of a two-dimensional
dielectric array using the coherent microwave transient spectroscopy technique. The
experimentally determined dispersion relations for electromagnetic wave propagation, for E
field polarization both parallel and perpendicular to the rod axis, were in good agreement
with theoretical predictions calculated using the plane-wave expansion technique. Certain
modes which were predicted experimentally were not observed because coupling between
these modes and the incident plane-wave radiation was forbidden by symmetry. Although
results for propagation along the (10) direction were presented, similar results were also
observed for propagation along the (11) direction. Furthermore, the COMITS technique
can also be used to explore the photonic band structure of three-dimensional photonic
crystals.
The authors thank F. Stem and J. Tsang of the IBM Research Division for their
critical reading of the manuscript.
1 7 D. E. Aspnes, Am. J. Phys. 50, 704 (1982).
108
Chapter 9: Electromagnetic Bloch Waves at the Surface of a Photonic
Crystal
in collaboration with
R. D. Meade and K. D. Brommer
109
The recent discovery1' 2 that periodic structures of dielectric materials (photonic
crystals) can be made to have an optical band gap in which propagating electromagnetic
modes are forbidden has been greeted with enthusiasm. These materials possess many
unique physical properties. For instance, defects in photonic crystals have been predicted3
and observed4 to localize electromagnetic modes. Moreover, the absence of radiating
modes will inhibit the decay of excited states whose energies lie in the band gap, which
may lead to unusual electronic2 and chemical properties of atoms or molecules embedded in
the photonic crystal. The absence of zero-point fluctuations in the photonic band gap also
has physical consequences, such as an anomalous Lamb shift.5 In addition, interest in
these materials has also been generated by their potential applications. In fact, the
prediction that photonic crystals would lead to efficient semiconducting lasers has been a
strong motivation for their development.6
In previous work, authors have considered properties of bands, 1 2 78 9 defects,3
and atoms 5 in infinite photonic crystals. In this paper, we will determine the effect of
terminating the crystal by examining the surface band structure of an interface between air
and a photonic crystal. We will show that photonic crystals have electromagnetic surface
modes, in which light is exponentially localized to the surface plane. However, unlike the
familiar case of metal surfaces, 10 in which the localization of electromagnetic surface waves
is a result of a negative dielectric constant in the metal, surface Bloch waves are localized
because of interference effects in the photonic crystal. Thus these surface waves are
1 K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan, and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3152 (1990).
2E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, and K. M. Leung, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 2295 (1991).
3R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 44, 13772 (1991).
4 E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, R. D. Meade, A. M. Rappe, K. D. Brommer, and J. D. Joannopoulos,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3380 (1991).
5S. John and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2418 (1990).
6 E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).
7 Ze Zhang and Sashi Satpathy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2650 (1990).
8 K. M. Leung and Y. F. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2646 (1990).
9E. Yablonovitch and T. J. Gmitter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1950 (1989).
10 R. F. Wallis and G. I. Stegeman, Electromagnetic Surface Excitations, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986),
p. 2.
110
analogous to the electromagnetic Bloch waves occurring on the surface of multilayer
films.11 We will also discuss the impact of these results on the design of semiconducting
lasers. Understanding the surface band structure is of particular importance to these
devices, because by choosing a proper termination of the photonic crystal one can eliminate
the losses associated with radiation into surface modes.
In order to study the surface of a photonic crystal we have performed a series of
calculations of interface states. We have found that the surface states can be cataloged as
one of four types: extended both in the crystal and the air (EE), decaying in the air but
extended in the dielectric (DE), extended in the air and decaying in the dielectric (ED), and
decaying in both the dielectric and the air (DD). In the final case, which we will discuss in
detail, the light is exponentially localized at the surface. We will find that the surface
electromagnetic states are of two general types, having primarily transverse electric (TE) or
transverse magnetic (TM) fields. We will also present general arguments that surface
modes must always exist for some termination of any surface of a photonic crystal.
It has been noted by several authorsl 9 that there is a similarity between electronic
states in a periodic potential and electromagnetic states in a periodic dielectric. We can take
advantage of this similarity by applying the methods developed for electronic-structure
calculations, such as plane-wave expansions, in order to solve for the eigenstates of an
electromagnetic system. These methods, which have been described in detail by a number
of authors, 1,7,8 provide a simple and powerful way to solve problems in electrodynamics
which takes full account of the vector nature of the electromagnetic radiation.
Although we would like to study the surface of a semi-infinite photonic crystal,
computationally it is desirable to choose a system with a finite unit-cell size. Therefore, we
employ the supercell method in which slabs of dielectric material alternate with slabs of
vacuum. We employ a supercell with six double layers of photonic crystal and six double
lip. Yeh, Optical Waves in Layered Media (Wiley, New York, 1988), p.337.
111
layers of vacuum. Because the surface states are strongly localized to the uppermost
dielectric layer, the error introduced by the finite size of the slab is negligible, less than
0.1% as judged by the splitting between states on opposite surfaces. We expand in plane
waves up to a finite frequency, including -130 plane waves per polarization, per primitive
unit cell. We found that this was a sufficient plane-wave cutoff to describe the surface
states accurately, and increasing the plane-wave cutoff to 250 plane waves per polarization,
per primitive unit cell changed the frequencies by less than 0.1%.
Because it is the structure most likely to be employed in the production of a
semiconductor laser system, we have chosen to study the (111) surface of the photonic
crystal proposed by Yablonovitch, Gmitter, and Leung.2 This structure is described in
detail in Ref. 2. Qualitatively, this structure can be thought of as a set of dielectric columns
connecting the sites of a diamond lattice (in the same way that the bonds connect atoms in a
silicon crystal). These columns, then, point along the [111], [111], [111], and [111]
directions. The three columns along the [111 ], [ 11 1], and [ i11] directions are identical, but
the fourth column in the [ 111] direction has a larger diameter. A (1 10) cross-section of this
surface is shown in the inset to Fig. 1. The columns along the [111] direction point
vertically in this picture, and the diagonal rib connecting these [111] columns is a [i 111]
column. This surface contains a C3V symmetry, with the rotational axis normal to the
surface and passing through the center of the [111] column. Although we have chosen to
look at the (111) surface of the Yablonovitch structure, we expect that many of the features
of the electromagnetic surface states will be common to all photonic crystals.
Before we consider the band structure of the interface, let us first consider the
projected band structure of the air and photonic crystals separately. The union of regions
EE and ED shown in Fig. 1 is the projection of the free photon modes into the surface
Brillouin zone. For a given k = (k, ky), there are light modes at all frequencies o > ck.
Along the line co = ck, the light travels parallel to the surface, and increasing o represents
an increasing component of kz. Similarly, the union of regions EE and DE represents the
112
Electromagnetic Surface Band Structure
0.7
0.6
0.5; 0
o 0.3
a.)
cV^ 0.2
f-4
0.1
O
K r
FIG. 1. The band structure of the (111) surface of the Yablonovitch crystal
along special directions in the surface Brillouin zone. The shading denotes
regions in which light is transmitted (EE), internally reflected (DE), and
externally reflected (ED). The lines in the gap correspond to surface bands
in which light is exponentially localized to the surface (DD). The surface
Brillouin zone is shown in the lower right, with the irreducible BZ shaded.
The MI point is directed along (1, 2, 1) a distance of 2T3 (2n/a) from 17.
The K point is directed along (0, 1, 1), a distance of (-/8/3) (27r/a) from r.
This surface band structure corresponds to a termination of X = 0.75, shown
.in the inset with air above and photonic crystal below (dielectric regions are
shaded, and air regions are unshaded). Frequencies are in units of (2rc/a),
where a is the conventional lattice constant.
113
projected band structure of the photonic crystal. Note that the photonic crystal contains a
gap 0.49 < oa/(2;c) < 0.59 in which there are no allowed states.
It is now straightforward to understand the four types of surface states, transmitted
(EE), internally reflected (DE), externally reflected (ED), and surface modes (DD). In the
region of (k,o) marked EE, the modes are extended in both the air and in the dielectric and
so it is possible to have light transmitted through the crystal. In the DE region, there are
modes in the dielectric, but they are beneath the band edge for the air states. Thus the light
is extended in the dielectric but exponentially decaying into the vacuum, which constitutes
total internal reflection. In the ED region, the situation is reversed; and these states are
extended states in the air but they are in the gap of the dielectric. In this case, the modes are
extended in the vacuum region but exponentially decaying into the dielectric and so incident
light is reflected. Finally, we find there can be states in the region marked DD. In this
regime, the states are below the band edge of the light in the air, as well as in the gap of the
dielectric material. Thus the light is exponentially decaying in both directions, and so it is
localized to the surface plane.
The fields associated with the zone edge (M) surface mode are shown in Fig. 2(a),
which is a (110) cross section through the surface plane. Because the crystal contains a
mirror symmetry through this plane, the D field lies in the plane, while the H field is
everywhere normal to the plane, and is displayed in contours. Note that the fields are
strongly localized in the plane of the surface, with most of their character in the uppermost
dielectric layer. As is the case for the bulk modes and defect states,3 .4 most of the power
of the D field is concentrated in the dielectric regions. Fig. 2(b) displays the fields
associated with the M surface mode in a (111) plane passing through the top layer of the
surface. Although this is not a mirror plane, the H field is primarily in the plane, and is
shown as vectors, and the D field is primarily normal to the plane, and is shown in
contours.
114
FIG. 2. The fields associated with the zone-edge (M) surface mode for a
surface termination of = 0.75. The regions of dielectric are shown
shaded, while the regions of air are left unshaded. (a) The fields shown in
the (110) plane. The contours indicate lines of constant H. (Dashed lines
indicate contours of negative value). Because D is the curl of H, D is
always parallel to the equipotential lines of H, and is large only where the
gradient of H is large (where the equipotential lines are closely spaced). In
this cross section, k lies in the plane of the figure. (b) The fields associated
with the M surface mode, in a plane passing through the top layer of the
surface. The H field is primarily in the plane, and is shown as vectors, and
the D field is primarily normal to the plane, and is shown as contours. The
surface unit cell is circumscribed by the parallelogram, and the fields change
sign in alternate unit cells, consistent with a zone-edge state. In this figure,
k is directed vertically.
115
One interesting feature of the fields shown in Fig. 2(b) is that the magnetic field is
primarily in the transverse direction, perpendicular to the surface and to the k vector. For
this reason, we describe the mode as TM-like. However, the surface modes of a photonic
crystal are not rigorously TE or TM. To understand why this is so, let us consider the
simpler case of the surface of a multilayer film. In this case the distinction between modes
which are TE and TM is exact. This can be seen from symmetry arguments. The surface
of a multilayer film has a continuous translational symmetry parallel to the surface plane, so
we can label the states by in-plane k vector. Consider the mirror plane defined by the k
vector and the surface normal. Fields must be either even or odd with respect to this mirror
plane. Fields which are odd are normal to the plane, while fields that are even lie in the
mirror plane. If the H(D) field is normal to the plane, than the mode is TM(TE).
However, at the surface of a photonic crystal, the symmetry is lower and so there is no
rigorous distinction between TE and TM modes. Even though the rigorous distinction
between TE and TM breaks down at the surface of a photonic crystal, the fields displayed
in Fig. 2(b) lead us to describe the mode qualitatively as TM-like.
Until this point, we have considered the band structure of the one particular
termination of the (111) surface, shown in the inset to Fig. 1. However, the surface can be
terminated at many levels [see the inset to Figs. 3(a) and (b)]. By specifying the Miller
indices of a surface we determine the surface normal, and for periodic arrays of atoms this
uniquely describes the physical system whose surface properties we wish to investigate.
However, a photonic crystal has a lattice constant of macroscopic dimensions, and so we
need a nomenclature to determine not just the surface normal, but also the termination of the
surface inside a unit cell. To do so, let us introduce a termination parameter : (O • t < 1),
which describes the termination of any surface. Let r = 0 when the surface is terminated
through the bond center, as shown in the inset to Fig. 3(b), and increase linearly as the
height of the surface is raised, normalized so that the surface terminates at X = 1 when the
same physical surface as X = 0 is achieved.
116
U.
o 0.65
3 0.6
;3
:~ 0.55
0
3 0.5
0¢
v 0.45
0.4
N
0.7
t 0.65
C14
3 0.6
c" 0.55
0 .
0.5
L 0.45
0.45
0.4
FIG. 3. Surface band structure of (a) TM-like and (b) TE-like modes. This
figure shows the gap region of Fig. 1 on an expanded scale, with the same
labeling of the four regions EE, ED, DE, DD. The insets indicate the surface
terminations corresponding to the three values of x for which the surface
bands have been plotted (see Fig. 1, inset). Larger values of T correspond
to vertically higher terminations on the inset, which contain more dielectric
on the surface. Note that higher X yields lower values of surface band
frequency.
117
A 
m
In fact, we find that the surface band structure varies in an interesting manner as the
termination of the surface is changed, as is shown in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b). As the
termination of the surface is increased, more dielectric is added, and the frequency of the
surface mode is lowered. This can be understood in an intuitive way, recalling that the
dielectric is analogous to a region of low potential. As more dielectric is added to the
surface, the potential which the surface state experiences decreases, and so its frequency
decreases. Thus, as is increased, bands sweep down from the conduction band to the
valence band. These states may be either TM-like, as shown in Fig. 2(a), or TE-like with
the D field primarily in the transverse direction. Let us consider the band structure as is
increased from T = 0 to t = 1. The surface bands in the final termination are identical to the
surface bands in the initial termination, since the two correspond to equivalent surfaces. As
the termination is increased, exactly two states are swept from the conduction band to the
valence band, one of which is TM-like and the other is TE-like. Thus, by increasing the
termination of the surface from X = 0 to t = 1 we have added one bulk unit cell (per surface
unit cell), and increased the total number of states in the valence band by two (at each k
point).
This suggests a general argument, that any {nlm } surface (with n,l,m integers) of
any photonic crystal with a gap will always have surface states for some termination. If the
surface has integer indices, then it has a finite unit cell size, and a finite surface Brillouin
zone. Since the crystal as a whole has a gap, the surface Brillouin zone must also have a
gap. Suppose that as the surface termination is varied between any X and t + 1, there are b
bulk unit cells introduced per surface unit cell. There must then be 2b states transferred
from the conduction band to valence band. As the frequencies of these states are lowered
from the bottom of the conduction band to the top of the valence band, they must sweep
through the gap and become surface bands. This argument for the existence of surface
states also applies to the case of multilayer films which lack a gap in their full three-
dimensional Brillouin zone, but have a gap in the direction normal to the surface.
118
Finally, we discuss the importance of these results on the design of semiconducting
lasers. The possibility of employing photonic crystals to produce efficient semiconducting
lasers was first suggested by Yablonovitch.2 His proposal has several elements, which we
will review briefly. As a first ingredient, one uses microfabrication techniques to produce a
photonic band-gap structure from a semiconducting material. By choosing the proper
structure, one insures that the electronic band-gap energy Egap falls within the photonic
band gap. The next ingredient is to create a lasing mode at cod in the electromagnetic band
gap. This can be done by introducing a defect into the photonic crystal which creates a
localized electromagnetic mode. If the defect size is chosen so that hcod = 2 nEgap, then the
system can radiate into the local mode, which acts as a laser cavity. Because there is only a
single mode in the gap, there is no possibility for spontaneous emission into other
frequencies, which enhances the efficiency of this laser system.
The final step is to extract the light from the local mode. Even if the defect is
located several lattice constants below the surface, there will be some overlap between the
exponential tail of the surface states, penetrating into the crystal, and the exponential tail of
the defect state embedded within the crystal. Because of this overlap, the light confined in
the defect mode can escape by tunneling. But, depending on the surface, there are two
channels into which the light can escape, into the air states (ED) or into the surface states
(DD). Only the radiation which escapes into air is useful. The radiation which is confined
to the surface cannot be collected, and so this is a mechanism for loss. Fortunately, by
choosing a proper termination for the photonic crystal, one can insure that there are no
surface states at the lasing frequency. For instance, at a termination of T = 0.75 (see Fig.
1), there are no surface states in the region 0.54 < oa/(2ntc) < 0.59, and so this range
would be the optimal choice for the lasing frequency.
In conclusion, electromagnetic states can be localized at the surface of a photonic
crystal. We have found that these modes are of two general types, TE-like and TM-like,
119
and have presented general arguments that surface modes must always exist for some
termination of any surface of a photonic crystal.
We wish to acknowledge E. Yablonovitch for helpful conversations regarding the
semiconducting laser system, and for pointing out the similarity between surface states in
photonic crystals and multilayer films. Partial support for this work was provided by the
Office of Naval Research Contract No. N00014-86-K-0158. Finally, one of us (A. M. R.)
would like to acknowledge the support of the Joint Services Electronics Program.
120
