None
 
 
 
 
Essays in Institutions, Economic Policy and Development 
 
 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy at George Mason University 
 
 
 
By 
 
 
 
Silviu Dochia 
Master of Arts 
George Mason University, 2005 
 
 
 
 
Director: Richard E. Wagner, Professor 
Department of Economics 
 
 
 
 
Spring Semester, 2008 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
                                                                                                                                        Page 
List of Tables……………………………………………………………….……..…..….iv 
List of Figures……………………………………………………………….…..………..v 
Abstract...................................................................................................................……...vii 
 
1. Private participation in infrastructure: cancelled projects …….............................1 
Introduction  …………………………………………………………….……………...1 
1.1 Background and existing literature…………………………………….……………..3 
Infrastructure and development…………………………………….………….....3 
Private participation in infrastructure ……………………………………………6 
1.2 Hypothesis……………………………………………………………………………9 
1.3 Empirical model and variables………………………………………………………16 
1.4 Results……………………………………………………………………………….23 
1.5 Foundations and extensions……………………………………………………….....27 
1.6 Conclusions………………………………………………………………………….30 
 
2. Enterprise size and economic policy ………………………………………………32 
2.1 Economic policy and firm size: brief historical overview………………..…………32 
2.2 Firm size, risk and uncertainty………………………………………………………40 
2.2.1 The neoclassical theory of the firm: risk and firm size ……………..…………....43 
2.2.2 Firm size, uncertainty and growth……………………………………………….48 
2.3 Conclusions ……………………………………………………………………….55 
  ii
3. A framework for analyzing SME financing ……………………………………..58 
Introduction……………………………………………………………………………59 
3.1 The effectiveness of SME financing programs……………………………………60 
3.2 SMEs and the financial sector: possible constraints……………………………….63 
3.3 SME Financing Programs: Two Case Studies from Romania …………………….70 
3.3.1 Program impact at the firm level ……………………………………..................72 
3.3.2 Lessons from the Romanian case study –SME programs and financing sector 
development ………………………………………………………...............................82 
3.4 Conclusions………………………………………………………………………...91 
 
Appendix …………………………………….………………………………………..92 
References ………………………………………………………………………..…...95 
 
  iii 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
 
Table                                                                                                                            Page 
1. 1990-2003 energy consumption……………………………………………..…………7 
2. Cochabamba Water and Sewage System……………………………………..……….13 
3. The distribution of cancelled projects by sector……………………………..………..18 
4. The geographic distribution of cancelled projects………………………….….....…...19 
5. Empirical results………………………………………………………………….…...23 
6. Cancelled project by contract type………………………………………….………...26 
7. Romania macroeconomic indicators……………………………………………….....88 
8. The impact of the RICOP SME financing program in Romania……………………..90 
9. The impact of the BT SME financing program in Romania………………………….91 
  iv
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
 
 
 
Figure                                                                                                                            Page 
1. Cancelled vs. awarded PPI projects, 1990 – 2005……………………………….…..19 
2. Uncertainty, investments and profits………………………………………………...54 
6. SME financing in the economy……………………………………………………...65 
  v
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
 
ESSAYS IN INSTITUTIONS, ECONOMIC POLICY AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Silviu Dochia, PhD 
 
George Mason University, 2008 
 
Dissertation Director: Dr. Richard Wagner 
 
 
 
This thesis consists of three essays examining the relationship between institutions and 
economic development. 
 
Essay one focuses on private participation in infrastructure. Over the past decade private 
involvement in the provision of infrastructure services has grown increasingly common 
in a large number of countries around the world. Increased activity brought along a good 
deal of controversy, most frequently relating to the cancellation of high profile projects. 
This paper analyzes this phenomenon empirically, using project level panel data from the 
1990-2005 period. My first finding is that, contrary to popular belief, infrastructure 
project cancellations are rare. Second, contract cancellations are not randomly 
distributed, but seem correlated with a number of factors. I find that cancellation rates are 
higher for water sector projects, countries with a poor track record of protecting property 
rights and those with more effective local bureaucracies. Neither the level of GDP per 
capita nor its growth rate seem to be important factors, but larger current account deficits 
are correlated with more cancellations. Essay two examines the economic rationale for 
industrial policies aimed at supporting small firms with the intention of improving the 
rate of innovation and economic growth. I argue that such policies, while very common 
in the last few decades, frequently ignore two fundamental facts. First, a firms’ size is 
largely determined by the economic environment surrounding it, and in particular by the 
uncertainty it must face. Attempts to actively micromanage the mix of small to large 
firms while ignoring the environment they operate within is more likely to be harmful 
than helpful. The second often overlooked observation is that small and large firms often 
play complementary roles in the process of innovation. Instead of attempting to actively 
pick winners with certain characteristics, policymakers’ efforts are better spent on 
building a framework which is conducive to all innovation, wherever it may originate. 
 
In the third paper I analyze the real world impact of direct financing programs for small 
and medium enterprises. I base my analysis on two specific SME financing schemes 
implemented in Romania between 1998 and 2004, but my findings are broadly 
applicable. I argue that direct funding programs can suffer from two major flaws: a 
failure to address the financial system’s binding constraints, and a difficulty in dealing 
with imperfect information. I find that both problems were acutely relevant in Romania, 
where they created programs that appeared successful at the firm level but in fact had 
very limited impact. 
 
1. Private participation in infrastructure: cancelled projects 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
A large literature suggests infrastructure is in many countries a key constraint on 
economic growth. In the early 1990s this body of evidence was integrated in the 
Washington Consensus reforms to prescribe private participation in infrastructure as an 
important pro-growth policy (Williamson, 2000). Private involvement was seen as 
alleviating pressure on government budgets and greatly increasing efficiency in all 
economic areas, including traditional industries but also infrastructure, healthcare, 
education and law enforcement. In developing countries this led to boom of privately 
operated infrastructure projects that peaked in the late 1990s.  
 
This period of rising private involvement was followed by a sharp slowdown. Hall, 
Lobina and Motte (1999) summarize the changing mood at the start of the new 
millennium: 
 
Private-sector investment in developing countries is falling, multinational 
companies have failed to make sustainable returns on their investments, and the 
process of privatisation in water and energy has proved widely unpopular and 
      1 
encountered strong political opposition. […] Local civil society has successfully 
mobilised highly effective political activity, its opposition being based on the 
perceived conflicts between privatisation and equity, and over the role of the state 
and community in these sectors. 
 
This paper attempts to contribute to the debate over private involvement in infrastructure 
by analyzing the problem of project cancellations empirically. I use project level data 
from the World Bank’s PPI database covering 149 developing countries for the 1990-
2005 period. 
 
My first finding is that, contrary to frequently gloomy perceptions, contract cancellations 
are in fact quite rare in infrastructure. For the 1990-2005 period only 148 service 
provision contracts were cancelled in developing countries, out of a total of 3265 
awarded projects.  
 
My second finding is that contract cancellations are not randomly distributed. As 
previous authors postulated, water and sewage contracts are more prone to cancellations 
(Hall, Lobina and Motte, 1999). This effect is large, as water sector projects are about 
twice as likely as those in other sectors to be cancelled. I also find that the size of the 
current account, a useful proxy for inflationary expectations, is correlated with higher 
project cancellation rates. Ceteris paribus, countries with more secure property rights 
have fewer cancellations. Somewhat surprisingly, a more effective government 
bureaucracy is associated with higher cancellation rates.  
  2
 
1.1 Background and existing literature 
 
Infrastructure and development 
 
Good roads, canals and navigable rivers, by diminishing the expense of carriage, 
put the remote parts of the country more nearly upon a level with those in the 
neighbourhood of the town. They are upon that account the greatest of all 
improvements. They encourage the cultivation of the remote, which must always 
be the most extensive circle of the country. They are advantageous to the town, by 
breaking down the monopoly of the country in its neighbourhood. They are 
advantageous even to that part of the country. Though they introduce some rival 
commodities into the old market, they open many new markets to its product. 
Monopoly, besides, is a great enemy to good management, which can never be 
universally established but in consequence of that free and universal competition 
which forces everybody to have recourse to it for the sake of self-defence. (Adam 
Smith, The Wealth of Nations 1776, Pelican edition 1970, p. 251) 
 
Smith’s insightful words on the importance of infrastructure for trade and development 
still ring true to many economists today. Boucheas, Demetriades and Mamuneas (2000), 
for example, provide us with a close interpretation of Smith using Romer’s (1987) 
endogenous growth model and defining infrastructure as a cost reducing technology. This 
  3
lower cost method of production is shown to raise long term growth through increased 
specialization and trade, very much in the spirit of Smith’s original work. 
 
Other authors suggest slightly different channels through which infrastructure can help 
economic growth. Better communications and transport networks, for example, can make 
credit more easily available and relieve financing constraints, especially in remote rural 
areas. Better infrastructure can also improve healthcare and education, both with an effect 
on human capital and productivity (Agenor and Moreno-Dodson, 2006).  
 
The claim that good infrastructure in a precondition to growth has been tested empirically 
in a large number of studies. Aschauer (1989) wrote the breakthrough study in the field 
and found a large effect of the stock of infrastructure on total factor productivity. 
Aschauer’s (1989) findings were seen by many researchers as implausibly large 
(Gramlich, 1994, provides a good survey of critics), and spurred a number of efforts for 
better estimates. More recent studies seem to confirm a positive influence of 
infrastructure on development. Demetriades and Mamuneas (2000), for instance, examine 
the impact of public infrastructure on output in 12 OECD countries and find a significant 
long term effect in all cases. Canning (1999) and Roller and Waverman (2001) find that 
telecom infrastructure is particularly important. Calderon and Serven (2003) focus on 
Latin America and find positive and significant output contributions for 
telecommunications, power and transport infrastructure.  
 
  4
Micro level evidence from a number of new studies seems to reinforce these findings. 
Carlin, Schaffer and Seabright (2003), for example, find that infrastructure plays a 
distinct role in the firm’s decision to innovate and expand.  
 
Taken individually, empirical studies can generally be dismissed as inconclusive1.  As a 
joint body of evidence however, these findings seem to indicate that a significant number 
of countries currently operate at a margin where infrastructure constitutes an important 
growth constraint.  
 
Poor infrastructure is of more concern in developing countries, where incompetent or 
corrupt governments, insufficient administrative capacity, increased uncertainty and lack 
of funding all add to the problem. Some authors have gone as far as to argue that poor 
infrastructure, combined with geographical and resource endowment characteristics can 
leave some countries stuck in a “poverty trap” (Sachs, 2003).  
 
 
Private participation in infrastructure 
 
The realization that infrastructure is often an important growth constraint raises questions 
about the appropriate way to tackle this problem. Traditionally, infrastructure services 
were considered to have strong public good characteristics, and were provided by 
governments. Excludability is sometimes difficult and, as its been pointed out many times 
                                                 
1 Rodrik (2005) discusses the problem with cross country regressions, for example.  
  5
since the days of Adam Smith, positive externalities from good infrastructure might mean 
private supply is inadequate. 
 
More recently however, a new focus towards private sector participation in the sector has 
emerged. This change was initially implemented by Great Britain in the 1980s, and then 
spread across to developing countries as part of the 1990s “Washington Consensus” 
economic reform package (Williamson, 2000).  
 
Proponents of private involvement in infrastructure typically focus on the efficiency 
gains from private management. In developing countries a second powerful reason for 
co-opting the private sector exists: the public sector simply cannot afford to finance 
necessary infrastructure investments. Demand for infrastructure rose faster than GDP in 
many countries (see table for an example with energy consumption), making it hard for 
local governments to keep pace using taxation alone. This trend is projected to continue, 
and even accelerate. Fay and Yepes (2003), for example, argue that based on current 
population and output growth rates, consumer infrastructure demand will grow 
exponentially in developing countries for the next decade. Private sector investments in 
infrastructure are poised to continue growing.  
 
 
 
 
 
  6
Table 1: 1990-2003 energy consumption 
Source: International Energy Authority. 
 
Private involvement in the infrastructure sector, while increasingly common, carries 
significant risks. Private companies, through their focus on lowering costs and rising 
revenues, are frequently opposed by both poor consumers and labor groups. This puts 
pressure on local governments to renegotiate or even cancel previously awarded 
contracts. This threat is particularly important in projects with large up-front sunk costs in 
non-tradable assets which are particularly vulnerable to regulatory and political risk. The 
highly specialized nature of investments opens up the possibility of ex-post opportunistic 
behavior on the part of governments (Williamson, 1979, 1985).  
 
Recent empirical studies on private infrastructure provision often take a broad view of the 
factors influencing such projects. Of particular interest in this literature is the importance 
of institutions. These studies recognize private involvement does not happen in a vacuum, 
and ask a number of important questions as to the conditions which facilitate private 
sector involvement.  
  7
 
Most studies on institutions and private infrastructure provision focus on a single sub-
sector. Jensen and Blanc-Brude (2006), for example, look at the determinants of the 
number of water and sanitation projects per country between 1990 and 2004. They find 
that measures for the security of property rights and the quality of the bureaucracy are the 
most important institutions in attracting private sector participation.  
 
The only major study I am aware of that analyzes the importance of institutions for 
private participation in infrastructure and covers all sub-sectors is Banerjee, Oetzel and 
Ranganathan (2006). The authors use the 1991-2000 PPI dataset to argue that country 
level institutions characteristics play an important role in determining where private 
companies decide to invest. The study finds that property rights and bureaucratic quality 
are significant factors. Perhaps surprisingly, higher levels of corruption also seem to be 
correlated with more private participation.  
 
My paper comes to complement these recent studies by asking the question of what 
happens next: which private infrastructure projects fail, and are there any factors in 
particular that seem to matter for a projects’ fate? 
 
1.2 Hypotheses 
 
The null hypothesis I will test for is that project cancellations are randomly distributed, 
and independent of project characteristics, macroeconomic and institutional variables. 
  8
 
A. Strong institutions help lower project cancellation rates 
 
Conjecture one: Higher levels of corruption increase the rate of project cancellation.  
 
Shleifer and Vishny (1993) famously argued that opportunistic behavior will be a large 
problem in regions with highly corrupt officials and weak governments. Running a 
business in such an environment is more difficult, and more projects may be expected to 
fail. Louis and Rafiq (2006) offer a good collection of many real world examples of 
foreign investors running into trouble with corrupt officials.  
 
At the other end of the spectrum, a number of authors have suggested an “efficient 
grease” theory implies corruption can in fact help in an environment of heavy regulation 
(Kaufman and Wei, 1999). Arguments along this line of reasoning might indicate that 
corruption should have a positive impact by lowering the rate of project cancellations. 
The “efficient grease” view does not seem to be backed by as much empirical evidence as 
its counterpart. A notable exception are the results of Banerjee, Oetzel and Ranganathan 
(2006), who find that more corrupt countries seem to attract more private participation in 
infrastructure.  
 
Conjecture two: Higher regulatory quality lowers the likelihood of project 
cancellation.  
 
  9
Bureaucratic quality should matter for two reasons: initial contract design and subsequent 
regulation.  
 
Good contract design is essential to avoid future problems, and an effectively run 
government is in a better positioned to draw up such contracts. No contract will be able to 
cope with every future contingency, but obvious design flaws will almost certainly be 
fatal. For example, some contracts indexed tariffs to the local currency but require yearly 
investments/concession fees that were tied to foreign currencies. In Argentina this 
contract design flaw was exposed when the Peso was devalued in 2002, leading to a 
number of cancellations and international litigation cases. 
 
Regulatory quality matters greatly even where good contracts are already in place. This is 
important since regulators are more than benevolent extra-economic agents operating in a 
vacuum. As argued by Wagner (2006), governmental structures, much as regular 
“markets”, are best understood as arenas in which self interested agents interact with each 
other. This means regulators are subject to pressure from operators, interest groups, 
consumers and politicians. In a well functioning society regulatory agencies can facilitate 
dialogue between these groups. A poorly functioning regulatory agency, on the other 
hand, can fail to defuse tensions, forcing actors to opt for alternative solutions which 
include revoking licenses or outright expropriation after mass protests on the part of 
consumers. Box one presents a case that illustrates a mix of poor program design 
subsequently exacerbated by a poorly functioning regulatory agency.  
 
  10
Conjecture three: Projects in countries with better contract enforcement / court 
systems are likely to have fewer project cancellations. 
 
An environment in which contracts are generally respected and enforced is likely to have 
a positive effect on the relationship between operators and their suppliers and customers. 
A common problem with infrastructure supply, for example, is a rate of fee collection. 
This issue should be far worse in areas where customers are used to not respecting 
contracts and aware that local authorities lack the means and the will to enforce them.  
 
The relationship between local governments and the private operators is also likely 
affected by the overall level of contract enforcement. Reputation is an important deterrent 
for governments reneging on existing contracts, and is likely to matter far more in 
countries that are trying to maintain a good standing. An already tarnished reputation, in 
contrast, is unlikely to provide much of a deterrent. 
 
Conjecture four: Governments with higher democratic accountability scores are 
more likely to have lower project cancellation rates. 
 
Democratic accountability helps legitimize reform programs and private markets 
(Rodrick, 2004). This link has been empirically studied by Dethier, Ghanem and Zoli 
(1999), who did find that democratization helped structural reforms and privatization 
campaigns “stick” in Eastern Europe and Russia.  
 
  11
Conjecture five: Political instability expected to increase the chance of re-negotiations 
and cancellations. 
 
Projects located in countries whose governments are more likely to be overthrown 
through unconstitutional means clearly face higher uncertainty. On the other hand, 
countries with a long tradition of stable politics should result in fewer cancellations. 
 
B. Project characteristics influence cancellation rates 
 
Conjecture six: Energy and water sector projects are more likely to be cancelled than 
those in other sectors.  
 
As discussed by Hall, Lobina and de la Motte (2005), in many countries privatization of 
water and energy services remains a very unpopular reform. Consumer groups, non profit 
organizations such as Public Citizen, and worker’s unions often waged successful 
campaigns to discredit privatization plans. In a number of cases these opposition groups 
staged mass demonstrations to oust the private operators (see Table 2 for a brief 
description of the famous Cochabamba water concession in Bolivia). For their part, 
private operators frequently found returns in the sector were lower than expected due to 
low bill collection rates, high maintenance costs and tariff inflexibility.  
 
These concerns can in principle be alleviated by government subsidies and regulation. In 
reality, in developing countries governments often lack the ability to effectively regulate 
  12
and monitor private operators, as well as properly structure and design the initial 
contracts. Such governance shortcomings are likely to be far more important in the 
sensitive water sector than in the highly commercial telecommunications field. 
 
Table 2: Cochabamba water and sewage system 
In October 1999, the municipality of Cochabamba, Bolivia, awarded a 40-year exclusive concession to 
supply potable water and sewer services for the city to international consortium Aguas del Tunari. The 
consortium took over the assets of former municipal water operator Semapa. In 1999 local authorities 
were unhappy with the performance of Semapa, which had only achieved a coverage rate of 60% of the 
600,000 Cochabamba inhabitants for water services and 50% for the sewerage system. Network losses 
were high and water shortages were common, as only 23% of consumers had a 24-hour supply. The 
concession with Aguas del Tunari was intended to address these shortcomings. 
 
The terms of the 40 year concession were directly negotiated between Aguas del Tunari and the 
Cochabamba municipality. The direct negotiations came after an open international tender that failed 
when the sole bidder was Aguas del Tunari. The 1999 contract granted Aguas del Tunari exclusive 
property rights over all water sources in the Cochabamba Valley, including the ground water from all 
area wells, previously used for free by locals. Water tariffs were set by a formula that was intended to 
provide Aguas del Tunari a return on investment of 15%. Aguas del Tunari committed to invest $320 
million over the concession’s lifetime to improve the local water and sewage infrastructure. Some $180 
million were to be invested in the first 5 years of the contract, so that 93% of the city’s population 
would be connected to the water and sewerage systems by 2004. Aguas del Tunari also committed to 
build a 40 MW hydro power plant on the Misicuni river. 
 
The Aguas del Tunari consortium was 50% owned by International Water (a joint venture of Bechtel 
and Edison SpA of Italy). Abengoa of Spain held a 25% stake in Aguas del Tunari and four Bolivian 
investors held the last 25%: Sociedad Boliviana de Cementos, ICE Ingenieros, Compania Boliviana de 
Ingenieria and Constructora Petricevich S.A. 
 
In January 2000 Aguas del Tunari started operating the Cochabamba water systems. The consortium 
immediately announced an average tariff increase of 35%, in line with the terms of the contract, and as 
approved by the municipal Regulator. Water was also no longer free for irrigation, as Aguas del Tunari 
started to charge farmers that owned wells for the use of groundwater. This generated widespread 
objection among farmers. Some sources indicated that for many consumers water bills doubled and in 
some cases went up by as much as 200-300%. The rate increases, coupled with broader discontent in 
Bolivia over a nationwide crackdown on illegal coca production, police salary protests, and opposition 
to a controversial new water law unrelated to this project, sparked mass-protests, road blockades and a 
general strike in the city of Cochabamba in early 2000. 
 
In April 2000, during the widespread civil unrest, the managers of Aguas del Tunari left Cochabamba 
and President Banzar of Bolivia cancelled the concession contract on the basis that they had abandoned 
the project. In November 2001, Aguas del Tunari applied for arbitration at the World Bank’s 
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), seeking $25 million in damages 
from the Bolivian Government for their termination of the contract. 
  13
 
 
Conjecture seven: Projects with high levels of initial commitments are less frequently 
cancelled.  
 
The size of the initial commitments should matter for a number of reasons. The private 
operators undertaking large infrastructure projects are typically larger than those awarded 
small local contracts. This means they might have considerably more experience with 
similar projects. This should help forecast future earnings and costs, but also insist on 
better contract design.  
 
A counterpoint to this argument is that smaller companies may have better local 
knowledge and connections. Such projects also attract less public scrutiny, which may in 
some cases translate in less pressure on regulators to renegotiate/cancel signed contracts. 
 
 
C. Macroeconomic variables are important in determining project cancellation rates 
 
Conjecture eight: Volatility of the national currency is correlated with higher rates of 
cancellation.   
 
There are two main measures of currency volatility: inflation and foreign exchange rates. 
A variety of authors suggest inflation increases risk and lowers overall investments in 
  14
developing countries (for instance Cardoso, 1993, Larrain and Vergara, 1995). Volatility 
is likely to matter even more for the infrastructure sector, where tariffs are typically 
collected in local currency and closely regulated. Derivative contracts can, in principle, 
help lower this risk, but in developing countries forward markets are usually 
underdeveloped and diversification of risk is more difficult (Clark, Tamirisa and Wei, 
2004).  
 
Conjecture nine: Large current account imbalances are linked to higher rates of 
project cancellation. 
 
I will use the current account as a proxy for investor’s expectations of future exchange 
rate fluctuations. The link between a current account deficit and currency crises has been 
explored by a number of authors. Fischer (2003), for example, argues that large current 
accounts present imminent current and future dangers for macroeconomic stability.  
 
Fischer’s interpretation is contested by some authors who point out that large current 
account deficits are not detrimental when driven by growth enhancing foreign 
investments. Frankel and Rose (1996), for example, argued that even significant deficits 
do not increase the probability of a currency crisis. This means to get a “clean” impact of 
the current account on cancellation rates I will need to control for GDP growth. 
 
Conjecture ten: Growing economies are likely to have fewer cancellations.  
 
  15
A thriving environment typically translates in better collection rates and revenue, and, in 
principle, lowers the rate of cancellations.  
 
The opposite conjecture could be plausible here as well: favorable conditions can lead to 
rates of return considered too high by local governments, which can lead to project 
renegotiation and in some cases cancellation. A number of projects awarded in China in 
the late 1990s, for example, guaranteed minimum rates of return for the private operators. 
In 2002, after a period of sustained high economic growth and with soaring foreign 
investments, the Chinese government passed a law outlawing revenue guarantees, 
causing a number of projects to be cancelled. 
 
1.3 Empirical model and variables 
 
To test my hypotheses I use a probit model with the following basic form: 
 
Pr (CANCEL=1│ X, Y, Z) = φ (α+βX+γY+δZ+ε), 
 
where φ is the cumulative standard normal distribution function, and X, Y and Z are 
vectors of project-specific, macroeconomic and institutional variables, respectively.  
 
 
 
 
  16
A. Dependent variable 
 
My dependent variable CANCEL is a binary construct built from the World Bank’s PPI 
database. It takes the form: 
 
CANCEL = 1 if a project has been cancelled. 
CANCEL = 0 if a project has not been cancelled. 
 
The “CANCEL” variable does not include distressed or renegotiated contracts. I make 
this choice because, in contrast to renegotiations, cancellations are operationally easier to 
track, define and quantify in a meaningful fashion.  
 
The dataset I constructed is built on the 1990 to 2005 PPI database. For this timeframe 
the database contains a total of 3268 infrastructure projects that meet the following set of 
criteria2: 
 
•  The “infrastructure” name covers basic transport services (roads, railways, ports 
and airports), water and sewage treatment and distribution, energy generation and 
distribution, and telecommunications.  
•  They must take place in a developing country, as classified by the World Bank in 
1998. 
•  The project must have reached successful financial closure to be included.  
                                                 
2 For full details on the PPI methodology see http://ppi.worldbank.org/resources/ppi_methodology.aspx . 
  17
•  The private partner must at the minimum bears some operational risk. (This 
covers management and lease contracts, greenfield projects, concessions and 
divestitures, but does not include turn-key or maintenance contracts, where the 
private party does not share in the operational decisions and risks, and the service 
is essentially provided by the state.) 
•  The project must “serve the public”. This means that captive facilities, such as a 
power plant that only supplies electricity to a factory, are not included. 
 
 
The geographic and sector distribution of cancelled projects in my sample is presented in 
Tables 3 and 4 on the following page. The peak activity in PPI projects was reached in 
the late 1990s (Kerf and Izaguirre, 2007). The median cancelled project is five years old. 
(Figure 1) 
 
 
Table 3: The distribution of cancelled projects by sector 
 
 
 
  18
Table 4: The geographic distribution of cancelled projects 
 
 
Canceled vs. awarded PPI projects by year 
of cancelation, 1990-2005
s 400 30 s
oject 300 2205 oject Total projects
d pr 200 15 d Pr aCwaanrcdeeledd
e 10 e
ard 100 5 cel Projects
w 0 0 an
A C
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4
9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0
9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2
 
Figure 1: Cancelled vs. awarded PPI projects, 1990 – 2005. 
 
B. Independent variables  
 
For my institutional variables I use the World Bank’s 2005 Worldwide Governance 
Indicators (WGI)3. The data is available for 1996-2005 and covers all countries in my 
dataset. The main substitute measure of institutional quality is the International Country 
                                                 
3 Available at http://info.worldbank.org/governance/kkz2005/ 
  19
Risk Guide (ICRG). This alternative set goes back to 1980 and is excellent for time-series 
analysis, but is not the best choice for my study, as it misses a large number of countries 
with PPI projects. 
 
The WGI reports institutional scores varying between -2.5 and + 2.5, with higher scores 
representing better outcomes. The database is constructed from a variety of sources 
including surveys of firms and individuals and the assessments of commercial risk rating 
agencies, non-governmental organizations, and a number of multilateral aid agencies 
(Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi, 2006). At the country level institutional scores are 
relatively stable between 1996 and 2005. I use the average score during this period for the 
following WGI variables:  
 
•  Corruption, defined as the extent to which government officials use public office 
for personal gain. (CORR) 
•  Rule of law, measuring the degree of contract enforcement, the quality of the 
police force and the courts system, and the general level to which agents abide by 
social rules. (ROL) 
•  Regulatory quality, a variable that attempts to quantify the ability of the 
government to pass and enforce sound policies that support the private sector. 
(REGQ) 
•  Bureaucratic effectiveness, defined as the quality of public services and the 
ability of public servants to stay independent from political pressures. (EFF) 
  20
•  Political stability, a measure of the likelihood the government will be overthrown 
by extra-constitutional / violent means. (STAB) 
•  Democratic accountability, measuring freedom of expression and association as 
well as the degree to which citizens are able to choose their government. (ACCT) 
 
The second group of independent variables consists of a series of project level 
characteristics. These are taken from the World Bank’s private participation in 
infrastructure database, and include: 
 
•  The sector of infrastructure a project operates in: water and sanitation, transport, 
energy or telecom. (SECTOR, WATER, TRANSPORT, TELECOM, ENERGY) 
•  The size of the project’s total initial investment commitments, measured as the 
sum of money to be paid to the government and the committed investments in 
facilities. For future payments/investments the PPI database uses a present value 
figure. (TOTAL) 
•  The type of contract signed between the private operator and the government. 
Contracts are divided into divestitures, greenfield projects, concessions and 
management and lease agreements. (CONTRACT) 
 
My macroeconomic variables are taken from the September 2006 version of the 
International Monetary Fund’s “World Economic Outlook” report4. This data is available 
                                                 
4 Available at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/02/data/index.aspx . 
  21
for the entire 1990-2005 years, for most of the countries in my sample5. The 
macroeconomic variables I control for are: 
 
•  The logarithm of per capita gross domestic product, calculated at purchasing-
power-parity. (LOG_PPPC) 
•  Inflation, measured as the average annual percentage change in prices. 
(PCPIPCH) 
•  Current account balance as a percent of GDP, a useful proxy for future 
inflationary expectations. (BCA_NGDP) 
•  Foreign exchange rate fluctuations, calculated as the percent variance in yearly 
exchange rates. (FX_NSTD) 
 
Finally, I will test for systematic geographical differences by including the logarithm of 
the host country’s population, and dummy variables for the projects’ country, and the 
area it belongs to (East Asia Pacific, Europe and Central Asia, Latin America and the 
Caribbean, South Asia and Sub Saharan Africa).  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
5 In a small number of cases I had to use data from alternative sources that was missing in the IMF’s report. 
For example, the report contained no data on exchange rates for Serbia or Uzbekistan. I used market rates 
from http://fxtop.com and http://www.oanda.com instead. 
  22
1.4 Results 
 
Table 5: Empirical Results
probit cancelation rol_avg eff_avg water total contract
LOG_PPPPC pcpipch bca_ngdpd fx_nstd lp REGION_N
Iteration 0:00 Log likelihood = -602.337
Iteration 1:00 Log likelihood = -573.909
Iteration 2:00 Log likelihood = -573.008
Iteration 3:00 Log likelihood = -573.007
Iteration 4:00 Log likelihood = -573.007
Number of obs = 3262
LR chi2(11) = 58.66
Prob > chi2 =  0
Pseudo R2 =  0.0487
Log likelihood = -573.007
 
 
 
A. Institutions  
 
Institutions clearly matter for the cancellation rates of privately operated infrastructure 
projects. Taken as a group, institutional variables have a high Wald test score and appear 
statistically significant at the 99.45% level.  
 
  23
The most significant institutional variable is the rule of law index, which is statistically 
significant in a number of plausible model specifications. This result is in line with my 
prior expectations and the findings of previous studies (quote): better enforcement of 
property rights enforcement through more efficient courts and police departments is 
associated with fewer cancellations of privately operated infrastructure projects. The 
effect is fairly large: an improvement of one standard deviation in a country’s rule of law 
score is predicted to roughly halve the cancellation rate.  
 
The second relevant finding from my set of institutional variables is that higher 
bureaucratic effectiveness is correlated with more cancellations. Banerjee, Oetzel and 
Ranganathan find that higher levels of publicly provided infrastructure seem to crowd out 
private participation in infrastructure (2006, pp 16). My finding goes further and suggests 
that, even when private companies start infrastructure projects in countries with effective 
bureaucracies, they are more likely to be subsequently cancelled.  
 
The positive sign on bureaucratic effectiveness can be interpreted in a number of ways. 
One possibility is that governments that are relatively efficient at providing public 
services are more confident to step in and take over operations in controversial 
infrastructure projects. A second interpretation is that private provision in countries 
where infrastructure is not a binding constraint on growth may be cancelled more 
frequently. The ICRG index of bureaucratic quality is a score of the “quality of public 
services”, which include infrastructure provision.  
 
  24
The possibility that more contracts get cancelled when infrastructure is not a binding 
constraint fits with the observations of Rodrik et al (2005). In a first best world a long list 
of policies could be adopted simultaneously. In the real world this is never an option: 
even when well intended, policy makers operate under political constraints. This means 
where and how political capital is spend matters. It may be impossible, or at least 
counter-productive, for a government to insist on a highly unpopular water service 
privatization with little impact on growth. Sequencing matters for building support for 
future reforms. Ceteris paribus, countries with high scores for bureaucratic effectiveness 
could have other more pressing constraints on development, and local governments may 
be under more pressure to cancel those contracts. 
 
Corruption, regulatory quality and political stability scores do not appear to be 
statistically significant. This finding could be deceptive however, as all institutional 
variables in my dataset are highly collinear: pair-wise correlation coefficients range 
between 0.63 and 0.93. 
 
B. Project characteristics 
 
As postulated by Hall, Lobina and de la Motte (2005), water and sewage projects are 
considerably more likely to get cancelled. The predicted cancellation rate for water 
projects is 8.4 percent, the highest for any sector.  
 
  25
Hall, Lobina and de la Motte (2005) suggest energy projects also create a lot of 
controversy and may be prone to subsequent cancellation. My findings are that, in fact, 
energy is the sector with the lowest cancellation rate. Only 2.35 percent of all awarded 
energy projects were cancelled for the 1990-2005 period. 
 
The second result from my study is that larger investment commitments seem to be 
associated with a higher rate of project cancellation. The effect is even stronger when 
management contracts, where usually the private operator does not commit to invest 
anything, are excluded. 
 
 
Table 6: Cancelled project by contract type 
 
 
C. Macroeconomic variables.  
 
Inflationary expectations matter. A large current account deficit relative to GDP 
seems to be correlated with a higher rate of project cancellations. This finding lends some 
  26
support to the thesis that a large current account deficit may be perceived by investors as 
source of future macroeconomic instability (Fischer, 2003). The effect I find remains 
statistically significant even after controlling for historical inflation rates, national 
currency volatility and GDP growth.  
 
This finding may be an indication of a weakness in some contracts’ design when it comes 
to protection against future inflation6. This is essential for infrastructure services, whose 
prices are often closely regulated.  
 
1.5. Foundations and extensions 
 
The theory of public finance offers two major analytical frameworks for the study of 
government activities. On one hand there is the Anglo-Saxon tradition, which focuses on 
optimal taxation and spending levels. The ultimate goal of Anglo-Saxon public finance is 
to better understand goods markets with the ultimate goal of providing governments with 
improved policy tools. The most important competing school of thought is broadly called 
the Continental approach to public finance. The distinguishing characteristic of the 
Continental tradition is that governments are treated as a different kind of “market” in 
which rational agents interact. Understanding the inner workings of this political market 
is key. The main difference between these two currents is captured by Wagner (2006): 
 
                                                 
6 A well known example is the Aguas Argentinas contract awarded to French company Lyonnaise des 
Eaux. In this case water tariffs were indexed to the US, not the Argentrine, inflation rate. During the 
Argentine crisis of 1998 the Peso suddenly devalued, but water tariffs stayed the same in nominal terms. 
The contract was cancelled and a lengthy international arbitration followed. 
  27
The relationship between economy and polity is sequential in conventional fiscal 
theorizing: market equilibrium is first established, with government then intervening to 
shift society to some alternative equilibrium. This is, of course, as it must be with systems 
design, for an existing system is to be followed by some alternative. In contrast, when 
public finance is treated as a facet of social theorizing, the relationship between economy 
and polity must be coeval within a societal catallaxy. Moreover, primacy of analytical 
focus is placed on emergent processes of development and not on states of equilibrium. 
(Wagner, 2006, pp viii) 
  
In this paper I used many findings from the traditional public finance literature to build 
my case for the importance of good infrastructure for economic growth. Some of these 
papers explicitly speak of socially optimal levels of infrastructure provision, and ways for 
governments to get closer to these levels. These papers add much to our understanding of 
the role of infrastructure in developing countries, but in the end they are not fully 
satisfactory.  
 
Today there is increasing recognition of the fact that governments and markets rarely 
interact in the sequential manner assumed by traditional public finance. Rather, goods 
markets and governments are different types of forums in which the same rational agents 
interact with each other. The rules of interaction differ across these forums, but their 
analysis belongs in the same conceptual framework.  
 
  28
In this paper I attempt to quantify the impact of some of the rules of interactions in both 
public and private arenas for the private provision of infrastructure services. In my essay 
governments are susceptible to corruption, accountable to varying degrees and may be 
more or less effective at providing the services desired by their constituencies. These 
“institutional” factors are essential for understanding the rate of failure of private projects 
in infrastructure. 
 
This study can be expanded in a number of directions. On one front new developments in 
the field of public finance will provide a better analytical framework for analyzing 
infrastructure contracts. On another level much progress will be made in the future with 
the availability of richer data on infrastructure provision contracts. 
 
Efforts are currently underway to systematize a number of characteristics of cancellations 
which are missing in my analysis. For example, my data does not contain any information 
on contract renegotiations, which are more common than cancellations and potentially 
every bit as important. Another important missing piece of information in my analysis is 
the reason for a contract’s cancellation. These could include: over-enthusiastic bids from 
the private operators; abuse from poorly monitored public officials; popular discontent 
reflected in the actions of local politicians; inadequate insurance in the face of 
macroeconomic crises; miscalculation during attempted contract renegotiations. Perhaps 
certain types of government support have an effect on contract cancellation rates. Better 
data on these topics will help us form a better image of what happens to private 
infrastructure contracts.  
  29
 
1. 6 Conclusions  
 
The main goal of this paper was to analyze contract cancellations for privately operated 
infrastructure projects in developing countries. My results show that, for the entire 
population of projects undertaken between 1990 and 2005, cancellations are relatively 
uncommon. When they do happen, contract cancellations are not randomly distributed, 
and appear to be correlated with a number of institutional, macroeconomic and technical 
characteristics. The most controversial projects were for water and sewage services, 
while energy projects were very infrequently cancelled. A better record of property rights 
enforcement and lower current account deficits lower the likelihood of cancellations, 
ceteris paribus. 
 
An interesting finding from my dataset is that countries with more effective bureaucracies 
have higher rates of contract cancellations. This can be an indication that governments 
that are good at providing public services are more confident in retaking control of 
controversial projects. This trend is possibly accentuated in countries where unpopular 
privatizations take place and fail to deliver economic growth. Where infrastructure is not 
a binding constraint, politicians may be more willing to backtrack on unpopular sector 
reforms. 
 
My findings are directly relevant to both investors and policymakers interested in 
developing countries. Understanding the extent of the contract cancellation problem is a 
  30
useful first step in forming expectations about future projects. I also quantified the 
correlation between a number of technical, macroeconomic and institutional variables 
and project cancellations. In the academic literature, this study makes contributions to the 
growth literature, the debate on the importance of institutions and the public finance 
literature. 
  31
 
2. ENTERPRISE SIZE AND ECONOMIC POLICY 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Economic policy and firm size: brief historical overview 
 
Industrial policy is typically understood as the active support by the government of a 
particular economic sector through direct financing, regulation or law.  
 
The case for such policies typically rests on perceived “market failures” (Krugman, 
1986). These coordination breakdowns are thought to generate both immediate and long 
term problems. In the short run, the redistribution to correct for a market failure can 
provide an increase in total welfare. In the long run, growth rates are affected. A common 
argument today is that there are important externalities in knowledge and in new-good 
creation (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare 2005). If these externalities are significant, 
subsidies to the sectors generating them could be growth-enhancing.  
 
Throughout the past half century a key targeting factor for industrial policy has been firm 
size. The trend started in the decades following the Second World War, when many 
Western European countries adopted a large number of reconstruction programs in 
residential construction, industry and infrastructure. These programs, often planned and 
supported by the central government, created a network of firms that maintained a close 
relationship with regulators. These links grew over the following decades, and by the 
  32
1960s many policymakers embraced the idea of actively supporting the development of 
specific large firms – the “national champions”. (Hayward, 1995) 
 
A number of other factors contributed to the rise of “national champions”. In academia, 
this was a time when the Harrod-Domar model and its Solow-augmented form dominated 
growth theory. A central idea behind these models was that capital accumulation is a key 
determinant of productivity, and high savings/investments rates are essential. The 
apparent success of communist economies is another factor that doubtlessly helped 
generate some support for industrial policies aimed at helping “national champions”. 
Rapid industrialization was typically equated with the construction of ever greater 
factories, often planned and financed with public support.  
 
In this favorable academic and geopolitical context, the systematic policy of 
redistribution towards large firms became the norm in Western Europe by the 1960s. In 
the United States pressure on the government to actively support “re-industrializing” 
resurfaced in the 1970s and 1980s. Walter Mondale, the Democratic presidential nominee 
for the 1984 election was a vocal advocate of active industrial policy as the means to stop 
capital flight, deindustrialization and increase international competitiveness (McKenzie, 
2002)7. 
 
                                                 
7 Mondale’s nomination does reflect a clear preference in some part of both the electorate and the political 
establishment for such policies. However, broader support remained relatively weak, as reflected by the 
heavy loss suffered by Mondale in the presidential election.  
  33
Support for “national champions” gradually weakened during the 1980s. On the policy 
front, this change in perception was driven by the success of Margaret Thatcher’s reforms 
in Great Britain, as well as the collapse of centrally planned economies. In academia a 
number of empirical studies raised serious doubts as to the effectiveness of policies 
supporting “national champions”8. By the early 1990s a new “consensus” emerged in 
development economics, emphasizing liberalization and privatization, and 
institutionalized redistribution programs supporting large firms went out of fashion.  
 
The lower levels of redistribution towards large firms marked a shift, rather that an end to 
industrial policy. In fact, a new class of redistribution plans was greatly scaled up in the 
1990s: small business support programs.  
 
Examples of pro-small enterprise programs abound. Virtually every country now has at 
least one agency dedicated to the task. These agencies are typically created as popular 
means to foster growth in low and middle income countries, but are by no means absent 
from rich countries. In the US, for example, the Small Business Administration was 
created in 1953 with the goal to “maintain and strengthen the nation's economy by aiding, 
counseling, assisting and protecting the interests of small businesses and by helping 
                                                 
8 Paul Krugman summarizes the prevailing view among professional economists at this time: 
“The case for a targeted industrial policy therefore stands or falls on the issue of criteria for selection. Can 
we devise criteria for choosing targets which will by and large pick the right industries? If we can, can we 
devise an institutional framework which will actually act on these criteria and not degenerate into a system 
of political payoffs? The answers I will suggest are not encouraging. Most criteria for targeting suggested 
by the advocates of industrial policy are poorly thought out and would lead to counterproductive policies. 
While there are more sophisticated criteria suggested by economic theory, we do not know enough to turn 
the theoretical models into policy prescriptions. Indeed, we find it hard to tell whether industrial policies 
have been successful even after the fact. Given this lack of clear guidelines, it is very naive to suppose that 
government agencies can somehow intuit their way to appropriate policies.” (Krugman, 1987) 
  34
families and businesses recover from national disasters.”9 The total amount of loans 
awarded by the SBA has tripled after 199210. Japan has its own Small and Medium 
Enterprise Agency (METI) that provides a wide variety of services ranging from help 
obtaining venture capital to management consultancy and “smoothing adaptation to 
changes in the economic and social environment.”11 The list of country level agencies 
could go on and on. 
 
Multinational donors are also increasingly active in supporting small and medium size 
businesses. The World Bank, for example, spent over two billion dollars in 2004 on SME 
and micro enterprise support programs. Eighty percent of those funds were used for 
financing programs in developing countries.12  
 
The European Union, one of the most active regions in supporting national champions in 
the 1960s and 1970s, is today a leading promoter of active support programs for small 
business. This support was made explicit in June 2000, when the heads of state from all 
member countries met in Portugal to discuss the most effective ways to foster innovation 
and competitiveness in the region. An essential part of the European Union’s push to 
foster innovation was the adoption of the Charter for Small Enterprises, which clearly 
articulates the way small firms are viewed by many policymakers: 
“Small enterprises are the driving force for innovation and job creation in Europe. Their 
small size makes them very sensitive to changes in the industry and environment in which 
                                                 
9 http://www.sba.gov/aboutsba/index.html 
10 U.S. Small Business Administration, Results Report, Report to Employees July 2005—June 2006, pp 2. 
11 http://www.chusho.meti.go.jp/ 
12 World Bank project database. 
  35
they operate. This is why emphasis was placed on the need to facilitate the development 
of small enterprises by the Heads of State or Government and the European Commission 
at the European Council in Feira (Portugal) on 19 and 20 June 2000.  
The Heads of State or Government and the European Commission acknowledge the 
dynamic capacity of small enterprises, particularly when it comes to providing new 
services, creating jobs and fostering social and regional development. They also stress 
the importance of entrepreneurship and of not penalising some of the failures. “13 
The Lisbon agenda justified an expansion of various incentives for small firms at the 
national level, such as lower tax rates or direct funding. Another layer of programs was 
added at the EU level. For example, the Joint European Resources for Micro to Medium 
Enterprises (JEREMIE), a new program endowed with over 11 billion Euros, is 
scheduled to become operational in 2007.14 JEREMIE will offer advisory and technical 
assistance, equity and venture capital and guarantees both for micro credit loans and SME 
loans. 
 
The European Union’s pro-small business programs reflect a desire on the part of its 
members to increase the area’s competitiveness in innovative, cutting edge industries. 
Governments in poorer countries have somewhat different objectives, and are frequently 
more focused on employment and growth, rather than being at the technological cutting 
edge. What both groups have in common is a desire to replicate a “successful” economic 
                                                 
13 European Charter for Small Enterprises, adopted by the European Council in June 2000.  
14 http://www.eif.europa.eu/jeremie/ 
  36
environment in their economy, in the hope this will translate into economic performance 
comparable to that of the market leaders.  
 
From a historic perspective, the recent small business support programs are reminiscent 
of the pro-national champion policies of earlier decades. There is a strong similarity, for 
example, between the “innovation” based arguments used to justify these pro-small 
business programs and those iterated during the national champion era. Small firms are 
also commonly described as drivers of innovation.  
 
As a theoretical argument, the case for industrial policies is rarely disputed: a 
policymaker endowed with sufficient information could improve on market outcomes. 
The trouble is, real world policymakers rarely have enough information, when they need 
it, to effectively target the right areas of the economy. To make matters worse, 
bureaucrats may not have the right incentives to make the best policy decisions from a 
welfare standpoint. The net effect of these difficulties is that actual policies are often 
based on the wrong targeting criteria.  
 
Efforts to assess the link between firm size and innovation empirically fail to give 
convincing answers. Macro level studies relying on cross country statistical analysis raise 
doubts as to the benefits of a large SME sector: there seems to be no evidence that it is 
the SMEs which cause rapid economic growth. Rather, high growth rates seem to be the 
result of a good institutional mix that leads to – strong enforcement of property rights, 
reasonable regulation, and macroeconomic stability (Biggs, 2002, or Beck, Demirguc-
  37
Kunt and Levine, 2003). Studies undertaken from a micro perspective also often offer 
ambiguous answers15. Some authors show that in many cases large firms are far more 
productive than smaller ones (see for example William Lewis, 2004, pp30, for a 
discussion of McKinsey’s productivity case studies in Japan), while others find the 
opposite result (reference). Systematic empirical evidence on positive externalities by a 
subset of firms has also been harder to come by16.  
 
These indecisive statistical results are not entirely surprising. Much of the empirical 
discussion seeking correlations between the size of a certain sector and economic 
performance are “engineering”17 efforts often lacking an in depth understanding of why 
firm size should matter in the first place.  
 
In this paper I argue that firm size is the result of the risk and uncertainty in their 
operating environment. Because of its endogenous determination, firm size cannot 
become a policy target in and of itself. The primary lesson from the now discredited 
national champion era is not that large firms are inherently less worthy of redistributive 
programs, but that attempts to micro-manage the “mix” of small and large businesses in 
the economy may not be effective at stimulating growth.  
                                                 
15 A good survey of empirical studies into the link between firm size and innovation rates can be found in 
chapter nine of Freeman and Soete’s book The Economics of Industrial Innovation. 
16 Acemoglu and Angrist (2001) discuss the difficulty of establishing an empirical basis for even the least 
controversial “knowledge” externality – the return to schooling.  
17 Mankiw argues economists can be broadly classified as engineers and scientist: “My premise is that the 
field has evolved through the efforts of two types of macroeconomist—those who understand the field as a 
type of engineering and those who would like it to be more of a science. Engineers are, first and foremost, 
problem-solvers. By contrast, the goal of scientists is to understand how the world works.” (Mankiw, 2006) 
Much of the empirical literature on small firms, innovation and growth can be classified as an 
“engineering” effort, often without a solid understanding of why firm size should matter in the first place. 
  38
 
2.2 Firm size, risk and uncertainty 
 
As is the case with many topics in economics, the discussion of firm size can be traced 
back to Adam Smith and his Wealth of Nations.  In his epic book Smith points out that 
people are far more productive when they specialize and trade with each other than when 
they work separately. Smith demonstrates his point with an example of the division of 
labor in a pin factory18.  
 
                                                 
18 “To take an example, therefore, from a very trifling manufacture; but one in which the division of labour 
has been very often taken notice of, the trade of the pin-maker; a workman not educated to this business 
(which the division of labour has rendered a distinct trade), nor acquainted with the use of the machinery 
employed in it (to the invention of which the same division of labour has probably given occasion), could 
scarce, perhaps, with his utmost industry, make one pin in a day, and certainly could not make twenty. But 
in the way in which this business is now carried on, not only the whole work is a peculiar trade, but it is 
divided into a number of branches, of which the greater part are likewise peculiar trades. One man draws 
out the wire, another straights it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the 
head; to make the head requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on, is a peculiar business, to 
whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them into the paper; and the important business 
of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations, which, in some 
manufactories, are all performed by distinct hands, though in others the same man will sometimes perform 
two or three of them. I have seen a small manufactory of this kind where ten men only were employed, and 
where some of them consequently performed two or three distinct operations. But though they were very 
poor, and therefore but indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could, when they 
exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards 
of four thousand pins of a middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of 
forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, 
might be considered as making four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought 
separately and independently, and without any of them having been educated to this peculiar business, they 
certainly could not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day; that is, certainly, not the 
two hundred and fortieth, perhaps not the four thousand eight hundredth part of what they are at present 
capable of performing, in consequence of a proper division and combination of their different operations.” 
Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, I.1.3. 
  39
Smith’s pin factory example, interpreted literally, can be considered as one of the first 
explicit discussions of the determinants of firm size19. The main prediction of the pin 
factory model is that larger companies should have higher productivity levels than 
smaller ones. As long as it is technically feasible to split the production of a good into 
smaller and smaller sub-tasks, large firms will come to dominate every industry. This is 
troubling prediction, as the real world is clearly not made up solely of large companies, 
but, a mix of firms of all sizes interacting side by side. Much of the modern theory of the 
firm can be understood as an attempt to complement the economies of scale described in 
Smith’s pin factory.  
 
A key contribution to the literature on the boundaries of the firm came in 1921, when 
Frank Knight introduced his concept of uncertainty. Knight argued that people use two 
mechanisms to form expectations about the future. On one hand, there are situations, such 
as betting on the roll of a fair die, in which people know the true statistical distribution of 
expected outcomes, and consequently the amount of “risk” involved in an activity. On the 
other hand, people may contemplate actions whose distribution of outcomes is not 
known. In this case, agents must use “statistical probabilities” – attempts to discover the 
possible distribution of outcomes from existing observations.20 When the distribution of 
                                                 
19 Smith’s pin factory example also opens up the debate on increasing vs. constant returns to scale. David 
Warsh offers a great review of the main arguments in this discussion in his Knowledge and the Wealth of 
Nations (2006).  
20 “There are two fundamentally different ways of arriving at the probability judgment of the form that a 
given numerical proportion of X's are also Y's. The first method is by a priori calculation, and is applicable 
to and used in games of chance. This is also the type of case usually assumed in logical and mathematical 
treatments of probability. It must be strongly contrasted with the very different type of problem in which 
calculation is impossible and the result is reached by the empirical method of applying statistics to actual 
instances. As an illustration of the first type of probability we may take throwing a perfect die. If the die is 
really perfect and known to be so, it would be merely ridiculous to undertake to throw it a few hundred 
  40
outcomes for an action is unknown and there are no available empirical observations, 
people operate under “true uncertainty”.  
 
The difference drawn by Knight between risk and uncertainty is in my opinion highly 
relevant for the discussion related to firm size as it provides a good tool to organize the 
literature that examines firm size into two groups. The first, usually identified with the 
neoclassical theory of the firm, is exclusively concerned with how risks affect the 
production decisions of a firm. The second family of models focuses on the role of 
uncertainty in shaping firm’s structure and behavior. Since each group of papers 
addresses quite different economic processes, I will review them separately.  
 
2.2.1 The neoclassical theory of the firm: risk and firm size 
 
Modern economics formalized the relationship between risk and the behavior of the firm. 
There are three families of models linking risk to firm size (Bauer, 2005). Each analyzes 
how the firm’s output behavior changes when it faces risks in different areas: demand, 
access to inputs, and methods of production. Within each area two strands of research can 
be identified. The first focuses on how environmental factors change the internal 
structure of the firm: how worker compensation is structured, how decision making 
                                                                                                                                                 
thousand times to ascertain the probability of its resting on one face or another. And even if the experiment 
were performed, the result of it would not be accepted as throwing any light on the actual probability. The 
mathematician can easily calculate the probability that any proposed distribution of results will come out of 
any given number of throws, and no finite number would give certainty as to the probable distribution. On 
the other hand, consider the case already mentioned, the chance that a building will burn. It would be as 
ridiculous to suggest calculating from a priori principles the proportion of buildings to be accidentally 
destroyed by fire in a given region and time as it would to take statistics of the throws of dice.” (Knight, 
1921, III.VII.25.) 
  41
mechanisms are designed, etc. The second family of papers examines how the firm’s 
production decisions are likely to be affected by environmental and policy changes 
(Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1990). 
 
There are three areas of risk that can impact a company’s size and structure. First, there is 
risk about the demand for a firm’s product. Second, the methods of production used may 
change quite dramatically. Third, acquiring the right inputs may be a challenge. All these 
risk factors are in turn affected by meta-factors of risk, such as institutional instability 
and the technological environment21.  
 
A. The neoclassical theory of the firm with risky demand 
 
The first formalized model of a firm’s productive behavior which incorporated risk was 
proposed by Sandmo in 1971, and subsequently extended by a number of writers (Coes, 
1977, Feder 1977). The model removes the assumption that the demand for products is 
known with certainty at the time when output decision is made. The firm’s utility is 
modelled to be increasing in profit, but with a decreasing marginal utility of profit (Bauer 
2005). Firms are thus assumed to be risk averse and maximize: 
 
Max Ev(πi) = Epi – (1 + r) * c(qi).  
 
                                                 
21 Knight writes: “The world is made up of objects which are practically infinite in variety as aggregates of 
sensible qualities and modes of behavior not immediately sensible. And when we consider the number of 
objects which function in any particular conduct situation, and their possible variety, it is evident that only 
an infinite intelligence could grasp all the possible combinations.” (Knight, 1921, III.VII.15) 
  42
Here “π” is the firm’s uncertain profit, c(qi) is the cost function, “q”  is the output level, 
“Epi” is the expected price and interest rate “r” is the opportunity cost of staying in 
business. The profit maximizing output for the firm must satisfy: 
 
Ev(πi)[ Epi – (1+r)c’(q*)]+cov[v’(πi ), pi] = 0 
 
The last equation captures the main predictions of the neoclassical models of the firm: a 
risk averse firm will have a negative covariance between the marginal utility of income 
and price, and will produce less than a risk neutral firm. Coes (1977) also shows that the 
more “stretched” the distribution of the expected price around a mean the larger the gap 
between a risk averse and risk neutral firm will be. Put differently, this conclusion would 
seem to indicate that when demand for a product is riskier firm size tends to be small. 
 
B. Risk in acquiring inputs: asset specificity and access to finance 
 
Following Coase (1938), a large part of the industrial organizations literature focuses on 
the importance of transactions costs in shaping the structure of the firm. In his 
breakthrough article, Coase describes the firm as a system of relationships where 
resources are organized and combined using an internal allocation mechanism, different 
from “external” alternative to coordination through “markets” and price signals (Coase 
1937, pp 393). Coase argues that the boundaries of the firm are shaped by the relative 
magnitude of coordination and transaction costs inside companies versus those in outside 
“markets”.  
  43
 
This transactions cost approach gave rise to a number of insightful articles on the 
structure of the firm. Williamson (1983) applied the transactions costs argument to asset 
specificity. In some cases, Williamson agued, investments made to support a particular 
transaction have a higher value to that transaction than they would if used for any other 
purpose. This can create “captive” rents which can ex-post be appropiated by one of the 
parties, reducing the incentive to make the investment in the first place. A possible 
solution to this dillemma is vertical integration. The classic example in this literature is 
the purchase of Fisher-Body by General Motors in 1919 and 1926 (Klein, 1988) 22.  
 
Grossman and Hart formalized the transactions costs model of the firm in 1986. They 
distinguish between two types of contractible rights to an asset: residual and specific. 
When it is costly to describe and contract over all specific rights, it can be optimal to let 
one party purchase all residual rights.  
 
The conclusion from this literature seems to be that, when access to a particular resource 
is difficult and/or requires firm specific investments, vertical integration is a possible 
solution, and firm size is expected to rise (Klein 1988, Grossman and Hart 1986, Hart and 
Holmstrom, 2002). 
 
C. Risk in financial markets: capital structure and agency theory of the firm 
                                                 
22 Klein (1998) notes that some writers, including Ronald Coase, reject the idea that vertical integration was 
a better solution for the hold-up problem than long term contracts. Klein argues that long term contracts are 
never complete and can create hold-up problems of their own.  
  44
 
Risk in financing firms accounts for an entire literature attempting to explain the capital 
structure of the firm. The seminal article in this field was written by Modigliani-Miller 
(1958), and outlined the “irrelevance principle”. Simply stated, the principle shows that, 
in the absence of taxes, bankruptcy costs, and asymmetric information, the value of a 
firm is unaffected by how that it finances itself. This means it makes no difference if the 
firm is financed by issuing stock or taking out debt, or whether it pays dividends or 
retains its earnings in the firm. The Modigliani-Miller principle spurred a large number of 
studies analyzing what happens when one or more of the theorem’s assumptions are 
violated and risk is introduced into the model. 
 
Jensen and Meckling (1976) integrate elements from the neoclassical theory of the firm, 
agency theory and finance to argue that, when firms use a mix of debt and equity 
managers will be risk averse and firms will produce less than in a Modigliani-Miller 
neoclassical world. Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993), reach a similar conclusion.23 Bauer 
(2005) extends the Greenwald-Stiglitz model and shows that firms remain risk averse 
even when they can raise extra equity. Both models find that firms with access to more 
equity are less risk averse and produce more than those which are more equity 
constrained.  
 
                                                 
23 The Greenwald and Stiglitz paper is written in the New-Keynesian tradition of establishing micro-
foundations for macroeconomic cycles. In this case, asymmetric information in financial markets ensures 
cyclical behavior can easily be persistent, and may even be made worse when wages and prices are more 
easily adjustable. 
  45
The less information asymmetry there is between lenders and borrowers, the easier and 
cheaper it is for firms to raise financing of any kind. Larger firms certainly fit this profile, 
as they tend to be tracked by more financial analysts, have more standardized and 
transparent accounting standards and, in the case of debt financing, more assets to offer 
as collaterals (D’Melo and Ferris, 2000). 
 
 
2.2.2. Firm size, uncertainty and growth 
 
The level of mathematical formalism reached by neoclassical economists in describing 
the link between risks in the business environment to firm size brings a great deal of 
precision to the discussion, but fails to address some important questions. Most notably, 
neoclassical models of the firm ignore Knightian uncertainty, which by definition refers 
to unknown, and thus un-modelable, distributions of possible outcomes. This makes main 
stream economic theory appropriate for firms with short term horizons, over which they 
are not overly concerned with the fundamental changes in their business environment. 
Given the role such fundamental changes play in economic growth, ignoring them is 
highly unsatisfactory. As Bauer points out “time and uncertainty are integral parts of 
economic reality and omitting these facts is like playing Hamlet without Hamlet.” (Bauer, 
2005, pp 3)  
 
 
 
  46
 
A. Creative destruction, uncertainty and firm size 
 
Early writers on the theory of the firm recognized the importance of Knightian 
uncertainty. This is clear, for example, in Joseph Schumpeter’s first book - the Theory of 
Economic Development, written in 1912. Schumpeter starts with the simple observation 
that standard economic models predict no profits when systems are in “equilibrium”: all 
firms merely enjoy “normal” returns. This prediction is at odds with the real world, where 
many firms do in fact manage to obtain extra-normal returns. Schumpeter contends that 
the puzzle must imply that the real world economy is often not in “equilibrium”. 
Furthermore, Schumpeter notes, the economic agents who stand to enjoy extra-normal 
profits have strong incentives to try to move away from equilibrium and break the status 
quo. These incentives are the very fuel which keeps the engine of wealth creation going 
in a capitalist system. Schumpeter calls this dynamic force “entrepreneurship”, and sees it 
as being primarily the work of individual firm owners operating at the fringes of the 
established “circular flow” of goods and services, in new and typically small firms 
(Scherer 1992). These small firms venture into areas of Knightian uncertainty and make 
discoveries capable of causing systemic changes and great leaps forward24. 
 
                                                 
24 Following Schumpeter’s 1912 book, the term “entrepreneurship” is to this day associated with small 
firms, even in academic circles. Business schools for instance often offer courses in “small business 
management” under the entrepreneurship curriculum (Foss and Klein, 2004). Similarly, new efforts to 
measure “entrepreneurship” rely in large part on the share of small businesses and/or the number of startups 
in an economy (see for instance the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor). 
  47
Subsequent authors pointed out that Schumpeter’s description of entrepreneurship in the 
Theory of Economic Development is greatly simplified. In particular, there are many 
“entrepreneurial” acts undertaken by large firms. Established companies often have more 
resources dedicated to research and development activities compared to new start-ups 
(Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2003). Additionally, the idea of an extra-normal rate 
of return must go hand in hand with some degree of monopoly power. Larger companies 
may be in a better position to obtain and use this market power. By 1942 Schumpeter 
himself becomes convinced of the importance of monopoly rents for the innovative 
process. Schumpeter’s most famous term “creative destruction” coined in his 1942 book, 
refers to a process driven mainly by large corporations: 
 
“What we have got to accept is that [the large firm] has come to be the most powerful 
engine of … progress and in particular of the long run expansion of output not only in 
spite of, but to a considerable extent through, this strategy which looks so restrictive … 
In this respect, perfect competition is not only impossible but inferior, and has no title to 
being set up as a model of ideal efficiency.” (Schumpeter, 1942, p. 106)25 
 
Schumpeter’s two accounts of creative destruction point to two important 
misunderstandings. First, “innovation” and “entrepreneurship” are not homogenous 
commodities. Second, the difference between risk and uncertainty is important for 
understanding the role of firm size in generating the “creative destruction” process. Some 
                                                 
25 Schumpeter is reluctant to “accept” this trend, and worries about its consequences. The process of 
turning innovation into scientific routine made the art of the entrepreneur obsolete. Scientists and 
bureaucrats working for large corporations would replace entrepreneurs, eventually paving the way for 
socialism. Capitalism would become the victim of its own success. 
  48
entrepreneurial activities could plausibly be best undertaken by small firms, while others 
are primarily driven by large companies.  
 
B. Product life cycles, uncertainty and firm size 
 
A major area of study that deals with the possibility of multiple types of innovation and 
their link to firm size is the product life cycle (PLC) literature. Insights from a variety of 
fields are used to draw loose analogies between the evolution of industries and that of 
biological organisms. Typically PLC models are less concerned with describing a 
complete general equilibrium system and more interested in explaining particular 
observed patterns in real world industries.  
 
The product lifecycle literature makes clear distinctions between different types of 
discoveries or innovations. Jovanovic and MacDonald, for example, argue that in the 
early stages of an industry demand is uncertain, and a great deal of effort goes into 
product research. Once some general standards are in place the innovative emphasis 
shifts to process research and development. (Jovanovic and MacDonald 1994a,b). In a 
separate paper Klepper summarizes: 
 
“when a product is introduced, there is considerable uncertainty about user preferences 
(even among the users themselves) and the technological means of satisfying them. As a 
result, many firms producing different variants of the product enter the market and 
competition focuses on product innovation. As users experiment with the alternative 
  49
versions of the product and producers learn about how to improve the product, 
opportunities to improve the product are depleted and a de facto product dubbed a 
dominant design, emerges. Producers who are unable to produce efficiently the dominant 
design exit, contributing to a shake- out in the number of producers. The depletion of 
opportunities to improve the product coupled with locked-in of the dominant design leads 
to a decrease in product innovation. This in turn reduces producers’ fears that 
investments in the production process be rendered obsolete by technological change in 
the product. Consequently, they increase their attention to the production process and 
invest more in capital-intensive methods of production, which reinforces the shakeout of 
producers by increasing the minimum efficient size firm.” (Keppler, 1996, pp 562-563) 
 
It is important to note that, while PLC models discuss Knightian uncertainty and place 
structural change at the heart of the conversation, they are in agreements with many 
predictions made by neoclassical models of the firm. As Keppler suggests, higher levels 
of risk or uncertainty on the demand side, for example, are expected to reduce firm size in 
both neoclassical and PLC models26.  
 
Amar Bhide captures the essence of this similarity between neoclassical models of the 
firm and life cycle type models in his excellent book Origin and Evolution of New 
Businesses (2000). Bhide offers a fascinating account of how new companies get started, 
operate in their early days, and grow. The centerpiece of the book however is the 
                                                 
26 It should be noted that in the neoclassical models of risky demand firms produce less only when they 
behave in a risk averse manner. By contrast, PLC models do not require this strong assumption. 
  50
observation that there is a negative relationship between the amount of Knightian 
uncertainty faced by a firm and its size. (Figure 1) 
 
Bhide also shows that few startups in fact operate in entirely new fields. More often, new 
companies tweak existing products trying to find niches for themselves where they do not 
have to directly compete with larger firms. The search for such niches represents taking 
on some uncertainty, deviating from the industry standards.   
 
Large corporations are unlikely to be able to compete with smaller firms for highly 
uncertain projects.  Careful planning, an area where large firms generally have a 
competitive advantage, does not help very much in uncertain environments27. Poor 
incentive alignment can easily make operating a hierarchical structure considerably more 
difficult, as it is harder to infer the effort put in by agents at all levels and monitoring 
costs increase abruptly. By contrast, in small firms there is a closer relationship between 
owners, investors and employees, incentives are better aligned and principal-agent 
problems tend to be of lesser importance. This enables these firms to better explore 
uncertain opportunities.  
                                                 
27 Alfred Marshall first proposed adding “organizational capital” as a factor of production (Schumpeter 
1954, pp 559). This factor is extremely helpful when dealing with repetitive tasks, but considerably less 
useful (or even counter-productive) in uncertain environments.  
  51
 
Figure 2: Uncertainty, investments and profits28. 
 
 
It is important to note that a critical part of this discovery process is early recognition of 
failures. There are two important reasons for allowing firms to exit an industry quickly. 
First off, the quicker bad projects are closed down, the faster resources will be 
redistributed to higher end yields. Second, failed ideas provide important information in 
uncertain environments. This knowledge is greatly diluted when it is harder to distinguish 
between the successful and failed innovations. Given the high failure rates of small firms 
engaged in innovative activities, it is quite likely that programs supporting the entire 
group reach many under-performing companies.  
 
                                                 
28 http://www.bhide.net/book/Bhide_book_talk.PDF  
  52
Taken together, these findings indicate that small and large firms perform rather different 
and often complementary entrepreneurial acts. Trying to single out one group as THE 
main driver of innovation in the economy is ill-conceived. Small firms are needed to 
explore areas of uncertain demand and production methods, but it is large companies that 
invest in the process R&D necessary to lower prices and greatly increase welfare.  
 
2.3. Conclusions 
 
In this paper I have argued that the size and structure of firms is primarily determined by 
a number of risk factors they face. Two frameworks exist for looking at the precise 
connection between these risks and firm structure. The first is the neoclassical theory of 
the firm, which emphasizes the importance of quantifiable risks. Neoclassical theory is 
very useful for understanding firm behavior around a position of equilibrium, where no 
great disturbances take place. The second window into what determines the size of a 
typical company places its emphasis on Knightian uncertainty. This theory is less formal 
and precise, but better equipped to analyze the link between creative, equilibrium-
changing innovation and firm size and structure. 
 
The neoclassical theory of the firm predicts that firms will be smaller when the variability 
of demand around a mean is higher, when firm owners are more risk averse, and when 
the methods of production are not well known. By contrast, larger, more vertically 
  53
integrated firms are predicted to emerge when the major risk comes from acquiring inputs 
and/or relationship specific investments are needed.  
 
Knightian uncertainty is important for understanding the role of small firms in the 
process of innovation. When firms are faced with a set of decision for which the 
distribution of demand and the best method of production are not knowable a priori and 
for which there are very few empirical data points, the natural response of individual 
businesses is to construct such as a set of observations. This is best done by many small 
firms through a process of gradual experimentation with alternative product variants, 
production methods, contractual structures, bribes, etc. Large firms do not perform well 
at this task due to fast rising principal agent problems and monitoring cost. Additionally, 
many of the major advantages of being large are negated in such an environment.  
 
Viewing firm size as endogenously determined by the various risk factors present in a 
firm’s environment is an approach with important policy implications. In developing 
economies small firms may well have an advantage in dealing with weak and corrupt 
government – where there uncertainty in dealing with all levels of authority may require a 
flexible and experimental approach. Attempts to simply replicate the mix of small to 
large firms observed in more advanced nations is a fruitless exercise as long as the 
underlying local risk factors remain the same. In developed countries, where 
policymakers tend to focus more on fostering innovation and structural change, a similar 
problem exists: innovation rates are not driven by a particular ratio of small to large 
  54
firms. Instead, firm size is again endogenously determined and influenced by the rate of 
technological change and the increased levels of uncertainty it entails.  
 
Programs supporting small firms do not simply change the mix of large to small firms. 
Firm behavior within a target group is also affected. Small firms operating in a free 
market environment help discover new products and production methods by an adaptive 
process of experimentation and failure. Under an industrial policy regime, by contrast, 
subsidies to small firms may well slow this discovery process by encouraging firms to 
stay in the market longer than they should. Differentiating between winning innovations 
and failures can become more difficult. Paradoxically, the “small business sector” as a 
whole may well be less innovative when it receives government support.  
 
Reducing institutional risks for all participants regardless of their size is likely to have a 
bigger positive impact on the overall economy. In particular, market entry and exit should 
be as easy as possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
  55
 
 
3. A framework for analyzing SME financing 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Starting with the mid 1990’s it has become widely accepted in policy making circles that 
directly supporting small and medium size enterprises29 is good for economic 
development. The dominant view shared by policy makers is that SMEs are essential 
sources of innovation, growth and employment, but that their development is prevented 
by a wide range of market imperfections. This analysis forms the basis for a series of 
programs aimed at actively supporting SMEs.  
 
Access to financing is perceived as a particularly important problem for the SME sector. 
Firms of a smaller size have a harder time accessing financial markets than their larger 
counterparts. The main factor driving this fact is the greater information asymmetry 
between owners/managers and potential investors in the case of small firms. Typically a 
smaller business will have less standardized accounting systems and shorter histories, 
making it harder for financial institutions to assess its creditworthiness. The problem is 
compounded by the fact that small enterprises typically own fewer assets they can use as 
collateral. 
                                                 
29 The European Union defines Small and Medium Sized Enterprises as firms with less than 250 employees 
and either an annual turnover of less than ECU 40 million or an annual balance sheet total not exceeding 
ECU 27 million. (Recommendation 96/280/EC.) 
  56
 
Information asymmetry problems are typically worse in developing countries. This is the 
direct result of a more unpredictable environment and less sophisticated financial 
markets: specialized institutions and available financing instruments, no credit rating 
agencies, limited and unreliable information available – all reflected in higher financing 
premiums. For these reasons, as we saw in the previous section, international 
development agencies typically dedicate a good deal of efforts to provide additional 
funding for SMEs in developing countries. 
 
3.1 The effectiveness of SME financing programs 
 
This great level of interest in small business financing programs motivated a number of 
studies on policy effectiveness. Conclusions vary with the authors, and an overall verdict 
on pro-SME programs is not clear.  
 
A strong theoretical argument in favor of any aid program is the promise that even minor 
reforms which successfully relax “binding constraints” can lead to sustained growth30. On 
the other hand, failure to correctly diagnose a country’s problems may render otherwise 
sensible reforms useless31. Policymakers could, in principle, identify the general causes 
behind observed inadequacies in financing markets and design programs to address them.  
                                                 
30 Rodrik cites the example of China, where relatively minor but ultimately very successful policy changes 
in the agricultural sector worked very well, creating social and political capital for further reforms.  
31 Rodrik et al (2005) argue that it is relatively easy to differentiate between two large groups of problems: 
low access to finance and low returns to economic activity. The authors offer the example of El Salvador, 
which seems to have ample savings and good access to capital, and Brazil, where credit is scarce. 
  57
 
In practice such precise diagnostics are always difficult, and the implementation of the 
corresponding reforms even harder. Still, the question of how well a program targets the 
relevant constraints on development remains essential: failure here can waste resources 
and even have a negative impact on the recipient. There is some evidence that donor 
activity is correlated with lower growth rates and poorer economic performance 
(Djankov, Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2005). Some authors suggest that poorly 
designed aid programs can bring with them a “resource curse” and damage local 
institutions, increase corruption and in the end be detrimental to the target country’s 
economy (Brautigam and Knack, 2004). The defenders of foreign aid are not persuaded, 
and point out that it should be no surprise that countries which receive more aid have 
lower growth rates: that is where help is most needed. This debate is not likely to be 
conclusively resolved through cross country regressions32. What seems clear is that how 
well aid is targeted matters a great deal.  
 
Financing programs targeting the private sector are typically less controversial than those 
offering aid to national governments.  In general, programs that introduce new 
products/technologies are regarded as having the best chance to avoid the “resource 
curse” problem which can undermine local institutions. When they do not overlap with 
                                                                                                                                                 
Implementing the same set of economic policies in the same sequence in both nations is unlikely to be the 
best way forward. 
32 For a review of the problems with empirical research on the determinants of growth see: Why we learn 
nothing from regressing economic growth on policies, Rodrik, 2005.  
 
  58
existing financing institutions crowding out effects of the private sector should also be 
minimal. 
 
Success in this area is most often associated with microcredit programs, yet a similar 
reasoning could apply to SME schemes. The most frequently cited example of a 
financing program that spurred widespread financial sector changes is that of microcredit 
lenders in Latin America33. The first regional programs of lending to the poor were 
started by NGOs in the 1970s, with ACCION International as one of the first 
organizations to get involved. The NGOs implemented credit evaluation techniques that 
were novel at the time. At the center of this approach were the use of “social capital” as 
collateral and a more careful applicant evaluation. By the early 1990s some microcredit 
programs in Latin America applied for licenses to accept deposits from the population, 
moving upstream to becoming commercial banks. The first NGO to transition into a full 
fledged “bank for microentrepreneurs” was BancoSol of Bolivia, which opened its gates 
in 1992. BancoSol started off with some 22,000 customers. Over the next five years 
BancoSol proved the feasibility of microloans by registering low arrears for Bolivia 
(around 3.5%) and being some 10% more profitable than traditional Bolivian commercial 
banks. This success spurred imitators all over Latin America, and seems to be a case 
where innovative screening methods and new products introduced by non-commercial 
organizations revolutionized financing for poor people.34 
                                                 
33 http://topics.developmentgateway.org/microfinance/rc/ItemDetail.do~1060460?itemId=1060460 
Grameen type programs were independently started in South-East Asia around the same time, but there is 
less evidence of “demonstrational” effects there. 
34 For a more skeptical view on the impact of microfinance see Jonathan Morduch, 1998. Nathanael 
Goldberg, 2005, provides a broader review on the topic. 
  59
 
Expertly designed and targeted programs may be difficult to create and implement in the 
real world. In The White Man’s Burden, for example, William Easterly describes at 
length many instances in which policies aimed at spurring economic growth failed over 
and over again in many parts of the world or time periods. The main problem faced by 
aid programs, as Easterly points out, is that policymakers are “planners” who rarely have 
all the knowledge necessary to identify the relevant constraints, devise adequate solutions 
and implement them fast enough to remain relevant. 
 
In this paper I am directly interested on how well SME financing programs fit the 
“binding constraints” policy model, and how they are impacted by real world imperfect 
information. While the essay is written starting from observations on two specific 
financing schemes, the questions I address are framed for a far broader range of 
programs. Many of my conclusions are also easily generalized. 
 
3.2 SMEs and the financial sector: possible constraints 
 
In order to correctly identify the source of problems in the market for SME financing a 
broad analysis of the overall economy is necessary. We can distinguish between four 
separate types of agents that are relevant to this market: small and medium enterprises, 
financial institutions, regulators, and a broad category of “other agents” that encompass 
households, micro enterprises, large firms and state owned businesses.  
 
  60
A multitude of exchanges takes place between these actors, as shown in diagram one. 
Regulators receive taxes and fees in exchange for contract enforcement, setting standards 
and providing of some basic infrastructure services. Financial institutions provide a broad 
range of financial products to firms, ranging from basic loans and deposits to trade 
finance, structured finance or leasing. In exchange for these facilities financiers receive 
some payments, either in the form of interest or as fixed service charges. The SME sector 
purchases a number of inputs from larger firms or directly from households, while in turn 
selling their products to them for revenues.  
 
The interrelated nature of an economy means that serious problems with any of these 
relationships will impact all other areas. A lack of activity in the SME financing sector, 
for example, could well be driven by problems that originate elsewhere. Direct financing 
programs, with their narrow focus on supplementing the product offer for a particular 
group of agents, should therefore not be viewed as the universal cure for improved access 
to funding. When the most pressing problems lie elsewhere such programs are not going 
to be effective.  
 
Broadly speaking, there are seven areas that can at any given time be problematic:  
 
A. SME regulation 
 
A vast number of rules and regulations can affect the viability of a small business. Tax 
levels matter for the firms’ capacity to repay loans. In some countries paying taxes also 
  61
imposes significant administrative costs on firms35. In other regions dealing with licenses 
may be a large impediment for firms. Labor market regulation is often a huge cost for 
smaller firms in many countries (Botero et al, 2004). The quality of a country’s court 
system matters greatly for contract enforcement (Djankov, 2002). Bankruptcy laws can 
also make an important difference in how willing a lender will be to disburse funds to 
firms (Djankov et al 2007).  
 
 
                                                 
35 The doing business database maintained by the World Bank estimates that in Brazil, for example, a 
medium size firm spends some 2,600 hours in a preparing forms for 23 different tax payments. In Belarus a 
company is required to make 125(!) different payments each year, which take a combined 1,188 hours. 
  62
SME 
financing  SME Sector  Revenues, 
programs 
Inputs 
 
Set tax rates, labor 
laws, contract 
Financial 
Lobbying 
enforcement, etc. 
products  Revenues 
Feedback 
Votes 
Taxes 
Lobbying 
Feedback 
Financial  Taxes  Regulators 
institutions 
Financial sector 
regulation, 
Taxes 
Lobbying 
Feedback 
Revenues  Set tax rates, labor 
Financial  Votes 
laws, contract 
products  Taxes 
enforcement, etc. 
Revenues, 
Inputs  Other agents: large firms, micro 
  enterprises, households. 
Figure 3: SME financing in the economy. 
 
 
 
 
  63
B. SMEs’ influence on regulators 
 
Regulators are influenced by SMEs in a number of ways. Direct interaction with 
individual firms provides the basic feedback to regulators about necessary changes. Small 
businesses also interact with regulators through associations that represent large groups 
of entrepreneurs. When these basic mechanisms of communication do not function 
properly more forceful methods, such as organized protests, can take their place.  
 
Indirectly firms also influence regulators through the amount of taxes they pay. In 
countries with oppressive regulation an incentive for change comes from the promises of 
attracting tax revenues from firms operating in the informal sector. 
 
SMEs’ influence on regulators is not always efficiency enhancing. In a number of 
countries strong SME lobbies manage to pass legislation that hurts development by 
limiting entry and scale. In some industries large firms are far more productive than 
smaller ones, but small firms succeed in getting government protection against 
competition, with large detrimental effects on growth and productivity (see for example 
William Lewis, 2004, pp30, for a discussion of McKinsey’s productivity case studies in 
Japan). 
 
 
 
C. Financial sector regulation 
  64
 
Poor regulation of the financial sector can easily damage its competitiveness. In many 
countries entry is restricted, which reduces pressure on incumbents to expand their range 
of services. In other areas taxation of financial institutions can be a problem. Price caps 
on the interest rates lenders can legally charge to small businesses also restrict the range 
of products that are legally offered. In India, for example, banks often cannot break even 
on small loans because of regulation, mostly from local states, that forbids them charging 
the necessary interest rates (Radcliffe and Tripathi, 2006). 
 
D. Financial sector’s influence on regulators 
 
Financial institutions can exercise some amount of pressure on regulators to change 
unfavorable legislation. As with other companies, this can be done through direct 
lobbying or indirectly, through the promise of bringing in more tax revenues from 
formerly illegal activities. 
 
Large financial institutions will sometimes lobby for less, rather than more competition. 
In a market dominated by a few large banks, for example, these can be expected to 
attempt to limit entry. This in turn can have an adverse effect on the financing products 
offered. 
 
E. Inadequate financial products 
 
  65
Distortions coming from parts A through D exert a large influence on the range of 
products offered by the financial sector at a given point in time. Yet there may be other 
problems with SME financing that originate in the financial sector itself.  
 
Financial products are similar to goods in other markets: they need to address the specific 
needs of their intended users. This requires creative thinking and innovative solutions, 
and incumbent firms can fail to provide these types of advances. A 2007 report by the 
Boston Consulting Group notes that today’s financing industry is badly structured to 
reach small customers in developing countries. The study finds that banks, for example, 
use a top down decision making process which is not conducive to the type of innovation 
needed to develop new products that target small customers. 
 
Lack of innovation can have a negative impact in two areas of the financing market. First, 
it can reduce the range of available products. Second and perhaps more importantly, it 
can raise production costs for existing services when inefficient technology is used. 
 
The primary problem firms operating in financial markets face stems from the 
information asymmetry between lenders and borrowers. The screening methods used to 
reduce this asymmetry are an essential part of the “production technology” used by 
financial firms. Improvements in the screening process would make financing available 
to a wider range of agents. 
 
F. Inadequate revenues for financial institutions 
  66
 
Financial institutions tend to charge SMEs higher fees and commissions in order to 
compensate for higher processing costs and higher risks. If for whatever reasons small 
businesses are unable to pay the premiums, banks will be reluctant to deal with them. In a 
perfectly competitive environment this reality simply means that only projects/businesses 
that generate a high enough return to pay the premiums are financed. However, in real-
world situations there may be lots of distortions induced by various factors:  
-  Regulatory. Capping interest rates charged to small businesses is a typical 
example of policy aimed at supporting SMEs, which results in fewer transactions 
between lenders and small firms36. Many other bad regulations of the SME or of 
the financial sector have a negative impact on their capacity to do business with 
each other.  
-  Technological. Financial institutions do not have or do not use appropriate 
solutions/products for small businesses which results in excessive costs.  
-  Market structure. When the financial sector is weak and uncompetitive, banks 
enjoy some degree of monopoly power over firms and tend to pick only the deals 
most profitable for them. This usually means favoring large operations. 
 
G. Weakness in the broader economy 
 
A weak economy impacts SME financing in a variety of ways. A region with poor 
households and no profitable large firms is unlikely to attract a lot of activity in its 
                                                 
36 Radcliffe and Tripathi offer a good review of these interest caps in India, for example. 
  67
financial sector, which will in also lead to fewer products being offered to SMEs. Weak 
overall conditions also have a negative impact on the firm’s ability to sell its products and 
obtain inputs. This can make individual SMEs less predictable and can also negatively 
impact profitability. In such an environment even the financial intermediaries that do 
operate are likely to offer fewer products and charge higher premiums.  
 
3.3 SME Financing Programs: Two Case Studies from Romania 
 
Project financing comes in a variety of forms, from strictly commercial programs where 
an investor seeks to maximize profits, to pure donations. Many “development” programs 
position themselves somewhere in between these polar cases. Common examples are 
matching grants or loans with subsidized interest rates.  
 
To try to cover as much as possible of this diversity of real world small business 
financing programs I picked two funding schemes that were quite different in their 
design. The first program was managed under the European Union’s Phare initiative. The 
program’s objectives were pronouncedly “social”, and implementation was done through 
grants. The second program I chose was managed by the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). It was designed as a chiefly “commercial” 
instrument to provided loans to qualifying SMEs. 
 
For each of the two programs I conducted a number of semi-structured interviews with 
people from the implementing agency and entrepreneurs that benefited from the 
  68
programs. I also had interviews with individuals from financial institutions, consultants 
on financing, and the president of an SME association. The interviews were conducted 
over a period of five weeks in the summer of 2004. 
 
My first goal is to see how well the two programs I studied perform at the micro-level: 
what firms are reached, how honest or corrupt is the actual implementation, and how 
participant firms perform subsequently. One of the programs I chose has a pronounced 
social character, so I will also examine how it achieves these goals.  
 
This basic understanding of each program will then help me evaluate each of the two 
schemes on their impact in the development of the broader Romanian SME financing 
sector. To this end, I will rate the program’s effectiveness in each of the seven areas I 
outlined in section 3.3.  
 
In both cases I use two types of evidence: firm level interviews and macroeconomic / 
sector data.  
 
3.3.1. Program impact at the firm level 
 
A first step towards evaluating the effectiveness of SME financing programs is to look at 
the impact they have on participant firms. At this level we can see if the funding reaches 
“good” firms and if it helps honest entrepreneurs prosper. 
 
  69
Consider the example of Mr. Constantin Cucu, a Romanian entrepreneur I interviewed in 
the summer of 2004. Mr. Cucu was the CEO and owner of Cubus Tech. The company 
was located in Bucharest and specialized in advertising and printing. Mr. Cucu founded 
the company in 1994, using personal funds. Over its lifetime Cubus Tech has grown 
significantly: in 1994 the firm had four employees and revenues of $10,000; by 2004 the 
company had 45 workers and sales were over $2 million, with assets around $1.5 million. 
In 2004 the company was number seven in the Romanian advertising industry.  
 
In 2004 Mr. Cucu decided to expand the output of his printing shop by 30%. To achieve 
this goal Mr. Cucu asked his bank – Banca Transilvania37 - for advice on the best 
financing options available to him. BT was happy to help, and offered him a loan from an 
EBRD line designed to provide medium term financing to SMEs. Mr Cucu became a 
beneficiary of the SME financing program backed by the EBRD. 
 
The Banca Transilvania SME credit line that Mr. Cucu benefited from was part of a 
larger EBRD loan facility approved in December 1996, covering a number of early 
transition countries. At the time, the EBRD assessed that banks in Romania did not 
provide adequate medium and long term financing to SMEs.  
 
                                                 
37Romanian bank founded in 1993 in Cluj-Napoca (Transilvania) as a local alternative to larger state owned 
banks dominant by that time. BT enjoyed early local success and gradually expanded its network 
throughout Romania. Today (end of 2006) BT has a market share of around 4.6%, total assets of some US$ 
3.1 billion, total equity of $153 million and a net profit of $46.8 million. BT is also one of the most actively 
traded companies on the Romanian stock market, with a market capitalization of $1.2 billion. The fact that 
BT developed from scratch in Cluj forced the bank to rely heavily on small local clients. This focus on 
small businesses created in BT a corporate culture and philosophy that was different from that of the larger 
Romanian banks, placing BT as one of the leading Romanian banks in financing start-ups. 
  70
Banca Transilvania was chosen as one of the first participants in the EBRD SME Credit 
Line. The EBRD started its partnership with BT in 1999, by investing an initial 5 million 
Euros into the bank in exchange for equity participation. The 5 million were used to 
create a credit line for SMEs that would provide medium term financing in both foreign 
currencies and Romanian Lei. The first installment of the program was very successful, 
with many requests for financing and thus a large pool of quality projects to choose from. 
The loans performed well, with a default rate under 1%. The success of the first SME 
credit line extended to BT led the EBRD to invest an additional 5 million Euros into the 
Romanian bank. This makes the EBRD the largest stakeholder in BT, with 15% of the 
total shares38.  
 
Like Mr. Cucu, typical beneficiaries of the EBRD SME loans are solid companies with 
very clear investment plans and profitable projects. The soundest available projects are 
prioritized for financing, and many “success” stories seemed to be generated at an 
individual firm level.  
 
This good rate of success at the level of individual firms comes from two sources. First, 
offering financing in the form of a loan forces good projects to self select themselves into 
the program. A firm that does not think it will be able to repay the loan is unlikely to 
apply in the first place. Second, the commercial character of the program insures that the 
implementing agency has every incentive to screen applicants carefully and work closely 
with them for the duration of the project. Often times, for instance, BT offered a number 
                                                 
38 The rest of 85.% of the shares are owned by investors with less than 5% each. 
  71
of consulting services to participant firms and developed a long standing relationship 
with them.  
 
In summary, the EBRD credit line looks like a success at the level of individual firms: 
•  The screening process was rigorous and honest. 
•  The financing reached solid firms. 
•  The projects that got funded are generally profitable. 
•  Participant firms often experienced good growth rates. 
 
A second approach to SME financing is exemplified by AP39, a participant in the PHARE 
RICOP grant scheme I interviewed in 2004. AP started his business in the summer of 
1992, when he had just graduated college and returned to his home town of Brasov. By 
pure chance he one day met a truck driver who was delivering oranges from Greece. The 
driver was desperately trying to find a buyer for a truck full of oranges, as the store he 
was supposed to deliver them to refused to pay for them. AP offered to buy the oranges 
from the truck driver for a very low price. Worried that the oranges were going to spoil, 
the truck driver accepted. AP sold the oranges in Brasov and made a small profit from the 
deal. Immediately AP started to look for a way to invest his newly found money. AP’s 
father was working in heavy truck factory in Brasov at the time, and though it would be a 
good idea to use the funds to start a small truck repair shop. AP agreed to use the money 
                                                 
39 Firms participating in the RICOP program are in principle tracked for a period of two years by the 
Romanian government to ensure they maintain certain contractual obligations. This Policy Comment could 
create some problems for the entrepreneurs I interviewed, so I will avoid using the full name of the 
business and its owner.  
  72
he had to purchase a small plot of land adjacent to the highway where they could build a 
garage and repair trucks.  
 
By 2004 there was little growth in AP’s truck repair business. He did manage to buy a 
larger plot of land in 2001, but it remained mostly empty, occupied by only a small shop 
selling auto parts. The firm never had a high volume of customers, as it averaged between 
one to two truck repairs per week. This made AP unwilling to commit to any commercial 
loan, unsure that he can generate the cash flows to pay the money back.  
 
In 2002 AP learned from the internet of the RICOP grants for SMEs. He assumed that 
most of the grants must be given away on some political criteria, or at least that some 
bribery had to be involved. Still, he figured it cannot hurt to learn more about the RICOP 
grants.  
 
The RICOP Grant program came from a fairly long tradition of European Union SME 
financing grants in Romania, started in 1992 with a ECU 4 million scheme. Most 
recently, the EU offered through its PHARE office grants for SMEs through RICOP – the 
Industrial Restructuring and Professional Reconversion Program. RICOP was designed to 
target areas with high rates of unemployment, where layoffs took place in the process of 
closing down or restructuring state owned enterprises. The goal of the RICOP program 
was to “support job creation and economic growth” by helping applicant SMEs with 
  73
matching grants between ECU 10,000 and ECU 100,000. The total amount to be 
distributed was ECU 30 million.40 
 
The RICOP program had ambitious objectives for both participant firms and local 
communities. Job creation and economic growth were central policy objectives of the 
program. The RICOP scheme was trying to simultaneously achieve more objectives than 
the EBRD program discussed earlier. This multitasking affected the program’s design in 
a number of ways.  
 
First of all, it was argued that because of its “social” component (job creation), the 
program was not meant to operate on a purely commercial basis. This translated into a 
choice of handing out grants rather than making loans. The grants were seen as an 
instrument to encourage job creation even in areas where there would otherwise be no 
employment opportunities.  
 
Second, a number of requirements were imposed on firms applying for the grants: they 
had to be an SME from an area with high unemployment rates (five such areas were 
designated in Romania); they had to be able to show a profit for the past two years; they 
were asked to partly match the EU grant; for each ECU 5,000 received a new job must be 
created; no alternative (commercial) source of funding should be available for the project. 
These requirements were imposed in addition to the “standard” screening process used by 
                                                 
40See www.ricop.ro  
  74
commercial loans, making the procedure for obtaining a grant fairly difficult. Often, 
business owners reported that it was easier to obtain a bank credit than a RICOP grant. 
 
The disbursement of the grants was to be done through Banca Comercial Romana (The 
Romanian Commercial bank – BCR), the largest bank in Romania, controlling almost 
25% of the banking sector’s assets. Using BCR as the implementing agency helped the 
RICOP program in two ways: it provided both a good network of local offices and a large 
number of credit officers trained to screen regular financing applications. 
 
The “standard” set of screening requirements was first applied to ensure that firms 
obtaining the grants were worthy recipients; SMEs that did not qualify were screened out. 
The additional requirements imposed on applicant firms were seen as necessary to ensure 
that the social objectives of the RICOP program would be met.  
 
After reading up on the RICOP program AP drew up a business plan that seemed to meet 
the grant requirements: he proposed an expansion of his auto repair business through the 
construction of a large service garage, where seven trucks could be repaired 
simultaneously. The RICOP grant AP requested was for the amount of ECU 70,000. To 
meet the RICOP requirements on job creation AP estimated he would need 15 new 
workers once construction of the new garage would be complete. Once the business plan 
was complete AP submitted it to the RICOP office, without much hope of being 
accepted. To his surprise, AP got the PHARE financing, without resorting to any bribery 
or using any connections. Work on the new seven truck garage started. 
  75
The desire to simultaneously reach viable projects that can be seen as “success” stories 
while at the same time achieving “social” goals and expanding financing to ventures that 
cannot obtain funds from commercial sources created a fundamental tension in the 
RICOP program.  
 
In an attempt to showcase “success stories” at the firm level, PHARE required very 
rigorous ex-ante screening of applicant firms, making it harder to obtain RICOP grants 
than regular commercial loans.41. While this rigorous screening ensured relatively high 
applicant quality, the process was incongruent with the programs’ goal of expanding 
traditional sources of financing, rather than replacing them. In annex A, section 1.6, of 
the RICOP application, for example, entrepreneurs are asked why their (presumably solid 
firms) cannot obtain other forms of funding for the project. When I asked entrepreneurs 
how they answered the question I always got a surprised reaction: most people did not 
remember that question; all entrepreneurs I interviewed told me it would not have been 
very hard to obtain funding from other sources (granted in most cases the investment 
would not have been made in the absence of a grant). This design inconsistency 
highlights a difficult question facing all non-profit financing programs: how do you 
consistently pick “winners” that were missed by the existing private sector financing 
system?  
 
                                                 
41 For a broader criticism of donor’s bias towards visible projects see William Easterly’s “The White Man’s 
Burden”. 
  76
In the case of the RICOP program, the use of grants made the situation worse: not only 
did the grants go to firms that in fact could have found alternative financing, but they also 
went to projects that were rarely very profitable. Interviewing people such as AP I 
learned that the use of grants encouraged SMEs to apply for funding even when they do 
not have a clear investment plan in mind. Just like AP, entrepreneurs typically did not 
apply for the grants because of a particularly good business opportunity, but simply 
because funding was available. In the process, business plans were drawn up and usually 
“prepped up” to pass through the screening process while entrepreneurs frequently did 
not believe in the forecasts they made. In my interviews I found that grant beneficiaries 
frequently listed as a major challenge for the future “using up the entire productive 
capacity” available after the new investment. When asked about future plans, AP, for 
example, simply stated that it would be great to keep the new truck repair shop working 
anywhere near full capacity. He was not sure he could find enough customers, as he’d 
never attracted that volume of clients before. This means investments made with grant 
money rarely turn out to be as profitable as they were projected to be in the original 
business plans. 
 
The principal agent problem we see here is one all financing programs have to face: the 
objectives of the principal (the development agency) are naturally misaligned with those 
of the agent (the beneficiary). As with all principal-agent problems the two available 
solutions are better monitorization or a better incentive scheme. 
 
  77
Monitorization by the agency disbursing the grants it is often very difficult. It is quite 
hard for the agency to correctly assess the ex-ante profitability of a project. Ex-post 
monitorization (output based aid, an increasingly popular instrument with international 
development agencies), is also not easy when financing SMEs. It is unclear what 
parameters should be monitored, and how this could be done effectively. The RICOP 
program, for example, attempted to use ex-post monitorization and ran into many 
practical difficulties. In theory, once the money was disbursed by BCR, the Romanian 
government was going to monitor participant firms for a two year period, to insure they 
maintained a set of “indicators”. For example, new jobs should have been created, as 
stipulated in the contract. Entrepreneurs knew such monitoring was in reality quite 
difficult: they often felt that in the unlikely event of an inspection they could always bribe 
their way out of trouble, or simply declare they intended to create the jobs at a later date. 
The choices made during the program design meant that many of the RICOP jobs are 
only created on paper.  
 
Because of these difficulties in solving the principal agent problem through increased 
monitorization, changing the incentives themselves may work better. Using loans rather 
than grants tends to minimize the principal agent problem, as entrepreneurs who do not 
think they can repay a loan will generally not apply for financing, unless they have 
outright fraudulent intentions. Entrepreneurs have a much stronger incentive to make 
more accurate forecasts about the future of their business when they share the costs of 
possible failure.  
 
  78
To summarize, the RICOP program exemplifies the problem of trying to achieve too 
many goals with the same instrument. Multitasking often leads to a lack of understanding 
over which goals are actually prioritized and the design of the program suffers. The end 
results are a diminished impact of the RICOP grant scheme at the firm level:  
•  The screening process was rigorous and “honest”. There were no reports in the 
press of blatant abuses of the RICOP funds, for example. 
•  The grants reached solid firms. 
•  The firms the program reached typically did have access to alternative sources of 
funding. 
•  The projects that got funded were not necessarily viable on a commercial basis. 
•  Participant firms often did not grow very fast after receiving the RICOP grants. 
•  The “social” objectives of the program were not achieved well. In particular, 
firms often did not create the numbers of jobs they promised in their business 
plans. The belief that the RICOP program can at the margin trade some growth 
impact for job creation proved to be illusory. 
 
3.3.2 Lessons from the Romanian case study –SME programs and financing sector 
development 
 
Financing programs often aim to do a lot more than provide temporary relief for a target 
group. The more ambitious goal is to help provide “sustainable”, long term financing 
solutions. This can only be achieved through the broader development of the financial 
sector, a process which leads to the creation of new products and improves financing 
  79
“depth”. This section focuses on the question of how well the two programs I studied 
target the “binding constraints” for SME funding, and how successful they are at 
facilitating the financial sector’s development.  
 
The theoretical outline from section 3.3 offers a natural way to frame this discussion. As I 
argued there, many factors can lead to low levels of financial intermediation. Direct 
funding programs only target a small subset of problems. Moreover, direct funding 
schemes are likely most effective when they introduce innovative new financial products 
in the market. 
 
Similarly to all other entrepreneurs I interviewed in 2004, Mr. Cucu felt that access to 
financing for SMEs had improved significantly compared to previous years. Mr. Cucu 
felt that even in the absence of the EBRD facility he would still have received funding 
from BT for his expansion. He was confident in his business plan and his company had a 
good track record. He felt financing of good projects was generally available. More 
detrimental to his business were in Mr. Cucu’s opinion the relatively high taxation, the 
system of permits, the frequently changing regulation and competition from the networks 
of friends in the state owned sector of the economy. Mr. Cucu also mentioned that he did 
not plan on hiring any new workers with the expansion of his business. He preferred to 
substitute labor with capital, and was investing the entire amount of the credit in 
acquiring new machinery. Excessive regulation of the labor market, particularly the 
difficulty of firing incompetent full time employees, was the main reason Mr. Cucu tried 
to avoid hiring more workers.  
  80
 
AP also felt that financing was not the most important concern for him, but for a slightly 
different reason: he could afford to take his time in expanding his garage; did not feel he 
was missing out on a great immediate business opportunity. Comparing AP’s experience 
with that of Mr. Cucu, it is clear that small firms are not a homogenous group. Some 
innovate, experiment and grow, others do not. Reallocating scarce resources towards the 
latter group can easily have a negative impact for the economy. Even if funding programs 
could somehow overwhelmingly target the innovators, it is unclear they would have a 
beneficial impact. Small firms typically have a comparative advantage in uncertain 
environments, where trial and error experimentation helps reveal the best production 
methods, the customer’s tastes, and so on. At this stage it is critical firms recognize 
failure early and either change strategies or exit. Programs that slow down this process by 
rewarding all firms of a certain size could well be counter-productive when they keep 
scarce resources in low yield projects. The lesson is that SME support programs can 
change the behavior of firms in a detrimental way, by reducing the rate of turnover 
essential for adaptive innovation. 
 
AP felt that the biggest problems facing SMEs felt were the large number of licenses and 
permits required for constructing new buildings (a pressing issue for him, in the middle 
of the expansion process). Taxation and frequently changing legislation were also issues 
AP viewed as important.  
 
  81
Can this improvement in the availability of financing for SMEs be viewed as a success of 
financing programs such as the EBRD SME credit line or the RICOP grants? The EBRD, 
and most other developmental agencies, would like to at least in part answer “yes”.  
 
The EBRD SME loan program made an explicit goal of helping Romanian small firms 
find long term, sustainable financing solutions. To achieve its objective the EBRD 
correctly believed its program had to impact the broader financial sector. The EBRD 
identified three channels through which it could influence the quality and depth of SME 
financing:  
 
•  Investing in local banks would strengthen their balance sheets, improve corporate 
governance and increase the level of competition in the financial sector. 
•  Leading by example: if an SME credit line can be proven successful, other banks 
would be more likely to start their own similar programs.  
•  Training bank staff in evaluating SME credit applications as a way of building 
institutional lending capacity.  
 
During my stay in Romania I had several informal interviews with local bankers, to help 
me asses the impact of programs such as the EBRD’s SME lending scheme on the 
financial environment of Romania. The general feeling was that their long term impact 
was minimal. It was certainly not the cost of training bank personnel, for example, that 
kept banks from lending to SMEs, but rather the fact that other market segments were 
more attractive at that time. Training of personnel was not, by itself, going to change that 
  82
fundamental fact. The binding constraint in this case was not access to training programs, 
and the EBRD did not introduce any new screening techniques. 
 
The Romanian financial sector has undergone major structural reforms starting from 
1998, centered on banks’ privatization. In 1998, 47 commercial banks were licensed to 
operate in Romania, out of which the 7 state owned banks dominated the market in terms 
of assets (64% of the banking assets), loans (around 60% of total loans to non-
governmental institutions) and territorial coverage (about 1400 out of the total number of 
1500 branches and agencies in the country)42. In the early 1990s many of the state owned 
banks were directed by the Romanian government to give out loans to loss making state 
owned enterprises. Large non – performing credits accumulated on the banks’ balance 
sheets. By 1997 a crisis was imminent, and by 1998 many banks were forced to file for 
bankruptcy43. The wave of bankruptcies brought the Romanian financial system to the 
brink of total collapse by early 1999. To its credit, the Romanian government managed to 
avoid a crash by radically restructuring the banking system. In 1999 two major banks 
with a sound financial situation were privatized: the Romanian Development Bank 
(BRD) and Banc-Post, both acquired by large multinational banks (Societe Generale and 
General Electric respectively). By the end of the 1999 state ownership in the banking 
system had fallen to 46%. Privatization progressed during the early 2000s and was 
                                                 
42 See Claudiu Doltu, The Evolution of the Banking System in Romania. 
43 The most notable victim at the time was Bancorex – owner of some 25% of the Romanian banking 
system’s assets. The Romanian government unsuccessfully tried to bail out the banks, investing some $600 
million (about 2% of GDP at the time) into a recapitalization of Bancorex. Banca Agricola was the second 
largest bank in distress, primarily because of its large portfolio of government directed non performing 
loans to the agricultural sector. Banca Agricola was restructured and in 2001 successfully sold to 
Raiffeisen. 
 
  83
practically completed by the end of 2006, when the largest bank in the system, Banca 
Comerciala Romana, was sold to ERSTE Bank from Austria, Currently, 37 out of the 
total of 39 credit institutions are now in private hands while foreign capital controls 89% 
of the banking assets,  
 
Privatization dramatically changed the way banks operate: government lending declined 
(from 11% of the banking assets in 2000 to 1.6% of the banking assets in 2006) while 
lending to households and companies increased over five times, from less than RON 6 
billion in 2000 to over 30 billion in 2006. At less than RON 1 bn., lending to state-owned 
companies remains marginal. Not only the available funds for businesses increased, but 
the cost of lending was reduced substantially: nominal interest rates came down from 
over 40% a year in 2000 to less than 10% in 2006. The lending process itself was much 
improved, with new products and procedures adopted by local banks drawing on the 
experience of their parent company abroad. Practically all banks now are competing for 
small business clients and advertise specially designed products and procedures for 
SMEs.  
 
Bank privatization is without a doubt the most important development in improving the 
availability of financing for Romanian firms. The process brought large multinational 
institutions to Romania, immediately increasing the level of competition in the financial 
markets, improving local governance and raising the amount of available funds. Although 
banks remain the most important financial intermediaries, other institutions are 
  84
increasingly playing a role in providing funds to SMEs: leasing companies, private equity 
funds, microcredit organizations.  
 
A second crucial factor contributing to the creation of a better financing environment is 
increased macroeconomic stability. Lower and lower inflation rates increased the 
credibility of the National Bank of Romania and reduced perceived uncertainty 
surrounding future monetary policy. This lower risk perception led banks to decrease the 
share of government securities in their portfolio, and to loan out more money. More 
stable inflationary expectations also reduced the spread between deposits and credits, 
making financing affordable to a larger segment of economic agents. The sustained 
growth and overall better environment had a positive effect on the companies’ balance 
sheets, improving their capacity to take credit.  
 
Table 7: Romania macroeconomic indicators 
  85
 
Finally, a series of legislative initiatives were passed by the Romanian government in an 
effort to align domestic legislation to the EU legislation that substantially improved the 
business environment44. A special law was passed in 2001 that created favorable 
conditions for small enterprises (simplified taxation based on revenues, not on profit).  
 
These important structural changes caused a rapid increase in the availability of domestic 
non governmental credit after 2000. The level of bank deposits as percentage of GDP, 
also increased significantly45. 
 
In this broader context the macroeconomic impact of the two SME financing programs I 
discuss in this paper is likely to be very limited. I conclude that the program’s impact is 
negligible for a number of reasons: 
•  The programs fail to offer innovative, sustainable, financial products or new 
lending technologies. The RICOP program uses grants, which are not 
commercially viable and will disappear once the program ends. The BT credit line 
fails to offer new screening techniques and products. This means the medium 
term impact on the financial services market is negligible. 
•  In the short run the programs can supplement existing funds and improve the 
“depth” of financing. However, crowding out effects seem to have been quite 
                                                 
44 It is worthwhile to note that Romania has in 2005 adopted a flat tax system: corporate profits as well as 
personal income are taxed at 16%.  
45 In spite of these recent improvements financial intermediation in Romania remains relatively low. For 
2003 total banking sector assets amounted to 33% of GDP in Romania, compared with a Euro zone average 
of 260% or an east European average of about 70%.  
 
  86
large for both schemes, as participant firms typically could have found alternative 
sources of financing. 
•  Grants awarded through the RICOP project were likely to go to lower yield 
projects and generate little growth. Entrepreneurs applied for funding even when 
they lacked confidence in the viability of their investment, which often result in 
misallocated resources.  
•  Volume: the two financing lines are almost invisible as a share of total credit. 
 
Table 8: The impact of the RICOP SME financing program in Romania 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  87
 
 
Table 9: The impact of the BT SME financing program in Romania 
 
 
To the extent that today it is easier for SMEs to obtain financing in Romania, as both my 
interviews and the macroeconomic data suggest is indeed the case, this is an 
improvement that cannot be attributed to direct financing programs. The Romanian case 
illustrates clearly that direct funding programs can easily fail to target the financial 
system’s binding constraints, and instead focus on treating their symptoms.  
 
3.4 Conclusions 
 
In this paper I have argued that any aid program needs to start with a careful investigation 
of the binding constraints affecting the economy at a particular point in time. It is only 
after such an analysis is complete that policymakers can hope to pick effective programs 
and avoid superfluous or potentially damaging ones.  
  88
 
SME financing programs cannot be expected to act as universal cures for observed 
inadequacies in the funding markets. There are many factors that can lead to inadequate 
SME financing which direct funding programs cannot address: SME regulation, SME-
regulator influence, financial sector regulation, the degree of pull exerted by the lenders 
on regulators, the competitiveness of SMEs in the economy, and the overall prosperity of 
households and other firms.  
 
The most promising route for direct financing programs to have a lasting impact is 
through promoting new and innovative products or lending technologies that are designed 
for clients without access to existing funding sources. 
 
In reality, direct financing programs are rarely implemented as a result of a careful 
analysis of the “binding constraints”. Rather, they represent a knee-jerk reaction to 
observed lack of financing, an attempt to treat the market’s symptoms while ignoring the 
underlying ailment. As a result, most financing programs fail to make a lasting impact on 
financial markets. 
 
I illustrate this problem with two case studies of financing schemes implemented in 
Romania between 1998 and 2004. My analysis indicates that the binding constraint in 
Romania was not an insufficient offer of financing products per say, but poor regulation 
and a lack of competitiveness in a financial sector dominated by state owned banks. Not 
  89
surprisingly, I find that the two programs I studied likely did not play an important role in 
providing a sustainable solution for small end medium enterprise financing.  
 
The Romanian case studies also illustrate a series of practical problems that confront 
most direct financing programs. Imperfect information, for example, means that even the 
short run impact of the two programs was not very impressive: they only reached firms 
that were able to obtain funding elsewhere. In some cases skewed incentives gave 
participant entrepreneurs a reason to overestimate the profitability of the provided funds.  
The long time it usually takes from the original design of the program and its 
implementation is another important concern, even when the relevant constraints can be 
carefully identified at the start of the program. In the case of Romania, many of the 
impediments to financing initially identified by the program designers had changed by 
the time it was implemented, making it either irrelevant or inadequate.  
 
Another concern about programs designed to support smaller firms is that they may 
change firm behavior in a counter-productive way. Small firms as a group play an 
important part in risky/uncertain environments, where small scale experimentation and 
adaptation important parts of the discovery process. A key ingredient in such 
environments is quick exit/failure. Subsidies rewarding all small firms likely slow down 
this process and reduce the rate of innovation. 
 
My findings provide project level evidence for a problem previously identified by a 
number of authors: skewed incentives faced by development agencies and 
  90
policymakers46. Experimenting with new financing instruments or selection algorithms 
takes a considerable degree of entrepreneurial spirit, and reaching out to firms which do 
not use financial markets carries significant project risks. International development 
agencies currently face only weak incentives to pursue such innovative opportunities. 
There are much stronger incentives to manufacture project level “success stories” and 
highlight them to donors by selecting safer firms who may already be able to access 
funding from alternative sources. The race for “success stories” may also play a part in 
the choice of direct financing programs even in areas where they will clearly fail to 
address the system’s binding constraints. My paper provides a critical tool for analyzing 
these “success stories”, and some hope for improving future programs.  
                                                 
46 See for instance Eastely, 2006. 
  91
Appendix 
 
 
 
"Kitchen Sink" model results
probit cancelation corr_avg rol_avg regq_avg eff_avg stab_avg acct_avg sector
total contract LOG_PPPPC pcpipch bca_ngdpd fx_nstd lp REGION_N
Iteration 0:00 Log likelihood = -602.337
Iteration 1:00 Log likelihood = -567.775
Iteration 2:00 Log likelihood = -566.592
Iteration 3:00 Log likelihood = -566.589
Iteration 4:00 Log likelihood = -566.589
Probit estimates Number of obs = 3262
LR chi2(11) = 71.5
Prob > chi2 =  0
Pseudo R2 =  0.0593
 
 
 
 
 
Significance testing for groups of variables: 
test  corr_avg  rol_avg  regq_avg  eff_avg  stab_avg 
           
  1    corr_avg  =  0 
  2    rol_avg  =  0 
  3    regq_avg  =  0 
  4    eff_avg  =  0 
  5    stab_avg  =  0 
  6    acct_avg  =  0 
           
  chi2(6) =   16.97       
  Prob > chi2 =  0.0094       
  92
           
           
test  sector  contract  total     
           
  1    sector  =  0 
  2    contract  =  0 
  3    total  =  0 
           
  chi2(3) =   35.85       
  Prob > chi2 =  0       
           
           
test  LOG_PPPPC  pcpipch  bca_ngdpd  fx_nstd   
           
  1    LOG_PPPPC  =  0 
  2    pcpipch  =  0 
  3    bca_ngdpd  =  0 
  4    fx_nstd  =  0 
           
  chi2(4) =  10.18       
  Prob > chi2 =  0.0375       
 
 
 
 
 
Rule of Law descriptive stats: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bureaucratic effectiveness descriptive stats: 
  93
 
 
 
  94
 
References 
  95
 
References 
 
Agenor, P.R., and Moreno-Dodson, B., 2006. “Public Infrastructure and Growth: New 
Channels and Policy Implications.” Working paper, available at 
http://www.new-rules.org/docs/epiam/agenor1.pdf 
 
Alchian, Armen A., 1965. “The Basis of Some Recent Advances in the Theory of 
Management of the Firm.” Journal of Industrial Economics (November): 30-44. 
 
Alchian, Armen A., 1968. Corporate Management and Property Rights. Economic Policy and 
the Regulation of Securities, Washington, D.C., American Enterprise Institute. 
 
Alchian, Armen A., 1979. “Some Implications of Recognition of Property Right Transaction 
Costs”. Economics and Social Institutions. 
 
Aschauer, D., 1989. "Is Public Expenditure Productive?" Journal of Monetary Economics 
23, 177-200. 
 
Aschauer, D., 1989. “Public investment and productivity growth in the group of seven.” 
Economic Perspectives 13, 17-25. 
 
 
Bauer, Michal, 2005. “Theory of the Firm under Uncertainty: Financing, Attitude to Risk 
and Output Behavior”. Institute of Economic Studies, Faculty of Social Sciences, 
Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic. 
 
Beck, Thorsten, Demirguc-Kunt, Asli , Laeven, Luc A. and Levine, Ross, "Finance, Firm 
Size, and Growth", 2004. NBER Working Paper No. W10983. 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=635386 
 
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 2005. “Financial and 
Legal Constraints to Firm Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of Finance, 60, 137-
77. 
 
Boettke, Peter J., Coyne, Christopher J., and Leeson Peter T., 2005. Hayek vs. the 
Neoclassicists: Lessons from the Socialist Calculation Debate in Elgar Companion to 
Hayekian Economics, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., Norman Barry, edition. 
 
Botero, Juan & Simeon Djankov & Rafael Porta & Florencio C. Lopez-De-Silanes, 2004. 
"The Regulation of Labor," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 119(4), 
pages 1339-1382, November. 
 
 
  96
Boucheas, S., Demetriades, P.O., and Mamuneas, T. P., 2000. “Infrastructure, specialization 
and economic growth”. Canadian Journal of Economics Vol. 33, no. 2, 506-522.  
 
Boycko, M., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W., 1993. ‘‘Privatizing Russia.’’ Brookings 
Papers Econ. Activity, no. 2, pp. 139–81. 
 
Buchanan, James, 1960, "La scienza delle finanze: The Italian Tradition 
In Fiscal Theory", in Buchanan J. Economics: Between Predictive Science and Moral Philosophy, 
Texas A&M University Press, 1987. 
 
Calderon, C. and Severn, L., 2004. “The effects of infrastructure development on growth 
and income distribution”. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile. Working paper no. 270.  
http://www.bcentral.cl/eng/stdpub/studies/workingpaper/pdf/dtbc270.pdf 
 
Canning, D., 1999. “Infrastructure’s contribution to aggregate output.” World Bank 
Policy Research Working Paper 2246. 
 
Cardoso, E., 1993. “Macroeconomic Environment and Capital Formation in Latin 
America” in Striving for Structural Adjustment: The Role of Capital Formation by L. 
Serven, and A. Solimano, Eds., The World Bank: Washington D.C, 181-228. 
 
Clark, P., Tamirisa, N., and Wei, S. J., 1994. “Exchange Rate Volatility and Trade Flows 
- Some New Evidence.” International Monetary Fund. 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/exrate/2004/eng/051904.pdf 
 
Coase, R., H., 1937. “The Nature of the Firm”. Economica, vol:4 iss:16 pg:386. 
 
Coes, D.: “Firm Output and Changes in Uncertainty”. The American Economic Review, 
1977, vol. 67, n. 2, pp. 249-251. 
 
Dethier J., Ghanem H., and Zoli E. 1999. “Does democracy facilitate economic transition: An 
empirical study of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.” World Bank 
Policy Research Working Paper 2194. 
 
Carlin, W., Schaffer, M., Seabright, P., 2003. “Infrastructure, competition and 
innovation: new survey evidence from transition”. 
http://idei.fr/doc/wp/2003/infrastructure_draft.pdf 
 
D'Mello, Ranjan and Stephen P. Ferris. 2000. "The Information Effects of Analyst 
Activity at the Announcement of New Equity Issues." Financial Management. Spring, 
29:1, pp. 78-95. 
 
Demetriades, P. O. and Mamuneas, T. P., 2000. “Intertemporal Output and Employment 
Effects of Public Infrastructure Capital: Evidence from 12 OECD Economies”. The 
Economic Journal 110, 465 – 687. 
 
  97
Djankov, Simeon, La Porta, Rafael, Lopez de Silanes, Florencio and Shleifer, Andrei, 
"Courts: The Lex Mundi Project" (April 2002). NBER Working Paper No. W8890. 
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=307127 
 
Djankov, Simeon, Hart , Oliver D., McLiesh, Caralee and Shleifer, Andrei, "Debt 
Enforcement Around the World" (December 20, 2006). ECGI - Finance Working Paper 
No. 147/2007 Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=953000 
 
Doltu, Claudiu. The Evolution of the Banking System in Romania, in Economic 
Transition in Romania, Past, Present and Future – Proceedings of the Conference 
“Romania 2000. 10 Years of Transition”, organized by The World Bank and CEROPE, 
October 1999 (volume edited by Christof Ruhl and Daniel Daianu). 
 
Easterly, William. “The White Man’s Burden: Why the West’s efforts to aid the rest have 
done so much ill and so little good”. The Penguin Press, New York, 2006. 
 
Feder, G, 1977. “The impact of uncertainty in a class of objective functions”, Journal of 
Economic Theory vol. 16, pp 504-12. 
 
Fischer, S., 2003. “Financial Crises and Reform of the International Financial System”, 
Review of World Economics 139 (1): 1-37. 
 
Frankel, J., A., and Rose, A., 1996: “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An 
Empirical Treatment.” Journal of International Economics, 41, November 1996. 
 
Freeman, Chris and Soete, Luc, 1997. “The Economics of Industrial Innovation”. 
Cambridge, MIT Press, 3rd edition. 
 
Gramlich, Edward M., 1994. “Infrastructure investment: a review essay.” Journal of 
Economic Literature 32, 1176-96. 
 
Greenwald, B. and Stiglitz, J.E, 1990. “Asymmetric Information and the New Theory of 
the Firm: Financial Constraints and Risk Behavior.” The American Economic Review, 
vol. 80, n.2. 
 
Greenwald, B.C. and Stiglitz, J.E., 1993. “Financial Market Imperfections and Business 
Cycles”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, n.1, pp. 77-114. 
 
Grossman, S. and O. Hart, 1986. “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of 
Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(4):691-719. 
 
Hall, D., Lobina, E., and de la Motte, R., 1999. “Public resistance to privatization in 
water and energy”. Development in Practice, Volume 15, Numbers 3&4, June 2005.  
 
  98
Hallberg, K., (2001): “A Market-Oriented Strategy For Small and Medium-Scale 
Enterprises”. IFC Discussion Paper # 48. 
 
Harris, C., Hodges, J., Schur, M., and Shukla, P., 2003. “Infrastructure Projects: A 
Review of Canceled Private Projects”, Public Policy for the Private Sector 252. World 
Bank, Washington, D.C. 
 
Hart, Oliver D. and Holmström, Bengt R., "A Theory of Firm Scope" (November 4, 
2002). MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 02-42. 
 
Hayward Jack Ernest Shalom, 1995.  “Industrial Enterprise and European Integration: 
From National to International Champions in Western Europe.” Oxford University Press. 
 
 
Janacek K (2000) Privatization in the Czech Republic: Results, Problems and Open 
Issues. Paper presented at Conference “A 10-year Review of Transitional 
Economies”, Vienna, WIIW, November. 
 
Jensen, M., C., and Meckling, W., H., 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, 
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure”. Journal of Financial Economics, III (1976), 
305–360. 
 
Jensen, Olivia and Blanc-Brude, Frederic, 2006. “The handshake : why do governments 
and firms sign private sector participation deals ? Evidence from the water and sanitation 
sector in developing countries”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3937.  
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2006/06/02/00001640
6_20060602090120/Rendered/PDF/wps3937.pdf 
 
Jovanovic, B. and Glenn M. MacDonald (1994a), “Competitive Diffusion”, Journal 
of Political Economy, 102(1): 24-52. 
 
Jovanovic, B. and Glenn M. MacDonald (1994b), “The Life Cycle of a Competitive 
Industry”, Journal of Political Economy, 102(2): 322-347. 
 
Kaufman, D. and Wei, S. J., 1999. “Does Grease Money Speed Up the Wheels of 
Commerce?” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper 7093. 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7093.pdf 
 
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Massimo Mastruzzi, 2004. “Governance Matters III: 
Governance Indicators for 1996, 1998, 2000, and 2002”. World Bank Economic 
Review. 18:253-287. 
 
  99
Kerf, M., Izaguirre, A., K., 2007. “Revival of private participation in developing country 
infrastructure: A look at recent trends and their policy implications.” World Bank Note 
no. 16, January 2007. 
 
Klein, B. "Vertical Integration as Organizational Ownership: The Fisher Body - General 
Motors Relationship Revisited", The Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 1988, 
pp. 199-213. 
 
Klenow, Peter J. and Rodriguez-Clare, Andres. “Externalities and Growth, Handbook of 
Economic Growth,” Vol. 1A, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., North-Holland, 2005, 817-
86. 
 
Klepper, S. (1996), “Entry, Exit, Growth, and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle”, 
American Economic Review, 86(3): 562-583. 
 
Knight, H. F., 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit Boston, MA: Hart, Schaffner & Marx; 
Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
Krugman, P. (1987). “Targeted industrial policies: theory and evidence.” 
http://www.kansascityfed.org/Publicat/Sympos/1983/S83KRUGM.pdf 
 
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R., W., 1998. “Law and 
Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 106: 1113-1155. 
 
Larrain, F., and Vergara, R. 1993. “Investment and Macroeconomic Adjustments: The 
Case for East Asia” in Striving for Structural Adjustment: The Role of Capital Formation 
by L. Serven, and A. Solimano, Eds., The World Bank: Washington D.C, 181-228. 
 
Lewis, W. (2004). The Power of Productivity.  
 
Little, I., M., D., 1987. Small Manufacturing Enterprises in Developing Countries. The 
World Bank Economic Review. 
 
Louis, T. W., Jr., and Rafiq A., 2006. “High Tension: Foreign Investment, Property 
Rights, and National Sovereignty.” New York: Oxford University Press, forthcoming. 
 
Mankiw, N., G., 2006. The Macroeconomist as Scientist and Engineer. NBER Working 
Paper No. W12349. 
 
McKenzie, Richard B., "Industrial Policy". The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. 
Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, Inc., ed. David R. Henderson, 2002. [Online] available from 
http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/IndustrialPolicy.html; accessed 13 October 2007; 
Internet. 
 
  100
Modigliani , F., and Miller, M., H., 1958. “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and 
the Theory of Investment”. The American Economic Review vol:48 iss:3 pg:261. 
 
Quiggin, J.: Production under uncertainty and choice under uncertainty in the emergence 
of generalized expected utility theory. Theory and Decision, 2001, vol. 51, pp. 125-44. 
 
Radcliffe, Daniel and Rati Tripathi, 2006. “Sharpening the Debate: Assessing the Key 
Constraints in Indian Micro Credit Regulation.” Institute for Financial Management and 
Research, working paper series, November 2006. 
 
Rodrik, D., 2005. “Why we learn nothing from regressing economic growth on policies”. 
http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/policy%20regressions.pdf 
 
Rodrik, D., Hausmann, R., Velasco, A., 2005. “Growth Diagnostics”. 
http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/barcelonafinalmarch2005.pdf 
 
Rodrik, D., 2004. “Growth Strategies.”  
http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/GrowthStrategies.pdf 
 
Rodrik, Dani, 2007. “Normalizing Industrial Policy”. 
http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/Industrial%20Policy%20_Growth%20Commission
_.pdf ; accessed 15 October 2007; Internet.  
 
Roller, L.H., and Waverman, L, 2001. Telecommunications infrastructure and economic 
development: a simultaneous approach.” The American Economic Review, VOL. 91 NO. 
4, pp 909-923. 
 
Romer, Paul M., 1987. “Growth based on increasing returns due to specialization”. 
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 77, 56-62. 
 
Rothbard, Murray N. 1985. Professor Hébert on Entrepreneurship, in The Logic of 
Action Two: Applications and Criticism from the Austrian School. Aldershott, U.K.: 
Edward Elgar, 1997, pp. 245–53. 
 
Sachs J. D. 2003. “Institutions matter, but not for everything”. Finance and Development, 
June, 2003.  
http://www.who.int/macrohealth/infocentre/media/en/sachs1.pdf 
 
Sandmo, A.: On the Theory of the Competitive Firm Under Price Uncertainty. American 
Economic Review, 1971, vol.61, pp. 65-73. 
 
Scherer, F., M., 1992. Schumpeter and Plausible Capitalism. Journal of economic 
literature, vol. XXX, pp. 1416-1433.  
 
  101
Schultze, Charles. "Industrial Policy: A Dissent." Brookings Review (October 1983): 3-
12. 
 
Schumpeter, Joseph A., 1911. “The Theory of Economic Development”. 1983 ed. New 
Brunswick. 
 
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1954/1981. “Histoy of Economic Analysis”, London: Routledge. 
 
Schumpeter, Joseph, 1942. “Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy.” London, 1954. 
 
Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W., 1993. “Corruption”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
108: 599-617. 
 
Stiglitz, Joseph E, 1969. A Re-Examination of the Modigliani-Miller Theorem. American 
Economic Review, vol. 59(5), pages 784-93, December. 
 
Trujillo, L., Martín, N., Estache, and Campos, J., 2002.  “Macroeconomics Effects of 
Private Participation in Latin America’s Infrastructure”. World Bank Institute, Policy 
Research Working Paper 2906. 
 
Wagner, E., Richard, 2007. “Fiscal Sociology and the Theory of Public Finance. An 
Exploratory Essay.” Edward Elgar Publishing, forthcoming. 
 
Warsh, David, 2005. “Knowledge and the wealth of nations. A Story of Economic 
Discovery”. W.W. Norton. 
 
Walter Piacsek, Michele Pikman, Janmejaya Sinha, Arvind Subramanian. "The Next 
Billion Banking Consumers". June 29, 2007, Boston Consulting Group. 
 
Williamson, J., 2000. The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 251–64. 
 
Williamson, O. E., 1979. “Transaction-cost economics: The governance of contractual 
relations.” Journal of law and Economics, 22:233-261. 
 
Williamson, O. E., 1985. “Economic institutions and capitalism.” New York: Free Press. 
 
World Bank. “Private Participation in Infrastructure Database”  
http://ppi.worldbank.org/ 
 
Williamson, O. E. "Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchange", 
American Economic Review, 1983, pp. 519-38. 
 
World Bank Group (2004). World Bank Group Review of Small Business Activities. 
http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/sme.nsf//AttachmentsByTitle/SME+AReport2004Full.pdf/$FIL
E/SME+AReport2004Full.pdf 
  102
 
CURRICULUM VITAE 
 
 
 
Silviu Dochia graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton in May 
2002, receiving a Bachelor of Science degree in Economics and a Bachelor of Arts in 
Mathematics. In 2005 Mr. Dochia received his Masters of Art in Economics from George 
Mason University. Between 2005 and 2007 Mr. Dochia worked as a consultant with the 
World Bank in Washington DC. At the end of 2007 Silviu Dochia moved to the 
Philadelphia area to work with Jeffrey A. Parker and Associates, a transportation 
infrastructure financial consultancy team.  
  103
