SURVIVAL AND SIGNALING CHANGES IN ANTIGEN PRESENTING CELL
SUBSETS AFTER RADIATION
A DISSERTATION
SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICAL AND SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
AND THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES
OF STANFORD UNIVERSITY
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE DEGREE OF
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
Jennifer Janell Parker
November 2010
UMI Number: 3442428
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
UMI
Dissertation Publishing
UMI 3442428
Copyright 2011 by ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This edition of the work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
uestPro
ProQuest LLC
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
(e) Copyright by Jennifer Janell Parker 201 1
All Rights Reserved
I certify that I have read this dissertation and that, in my opinion, it is fully adequate
in scope and quality as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
ÍSusan Knox) Pnncirri pal Adviser
I certify that I have read this dissertation and that, in my opinion, it is fully adequate
in scope and quality as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
(Samuel Straber)
I certify that I have read this dissertation and that, in my opinion, it is fully adequate
in scope and quality as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
I certify that I have read this dissertation and that, in my opinion, it is fully adequate
in scope and quality as a dissertation for the degree ofDoctor of Philosophy.
(Karlene Cimprich)
Approved for the Stanford University Committee on Graduate Studies.
ßt^Jl·. /9~~ph~
III
ABSTRACT
Radiation therapy is a widely used cancer treatment that has the potential to
influence anti-tumor immune responses. Both myeloablative and non-myeloablative
radiation are often used as part of preparatory regimens for hematopoetic stem cell
transplantation, in combination with other chemotherapy or immuno-modulatory (e.g.
Anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG)) therapies for both cytotoxic and immune modulatory
purposes. However, the mechanisms responsible for the effect of radiation on antigen
presenting cell (APC) responsiveness and radioresi stance are poorly understood.
The first studies described in this thesis were designed to identify and characterize
early radiation-induced signaling changes in antigen presenting cells and to determine the
effects of these signaling changes on APC receptor expression and function. The NFkB
pathway in antigen presenting cells was chosen for study because it is activated by
radiation in a wide range of other cell types and plays a vital role in the maintenance and
regulation of the immune system. The effects of therapeutically relevant doses radiation
(2 and 20 Gy) were compared at various timepoints in the human monocytic cell line
(U937) using phospho-flow cytometry staining methods and cytometric analysis. These
studies demonstrated that radiation-induced changes in the phosphorylation state of
NFkB family members that were p53 independent. However, these changes were
dependent upon activation of ATM in response to single or double-stranded breaks in
DNA, as shown in experiments using an inhibitor of ATM and ATM siRNA knockdown
U937 cells. In addition, studies examining the effect of radiation on co-stimulatory
receptors with and without inhibition of the NFkB pathway via phospho-flow cytometry
iv
revealed that radiation-induced phosphorylation of NEMO promoted the activation and
functional maturation of U937 cells. Furthermore, functional studies using both
phospho-flow cytometry and/or mixed lymphocyte reactions to examine co-stimulatory
receptor activation, pro-inflammatory cytokine release, and T cell proliferation with and
without radiation and inhibition of the NFkB pathway, demonstrated that NEMO is
necessary for the activation, maturation, and enhanced responsiveness of human subsets
of antigen presenting cells that occur after radiation. These findings provided insight into
the mechanism of action of radiation-enhanced promotion of the antigen presenting cell
responses. The methods of analysis employed can be used for monitoring immune
changes that impact immune modulation in transplantation and tumor vaccines studies.
Furthermore, NFkB pathway proteins have the potential to serve as biomarkers for
optimal anti-tumor responses. The NBD peptide may also have usefulness as a
therapeutic agent for inhibition of graft versus host disease (GVHD) in patients who have
undergone transplantation.
While the first set of experiments focused on antigen presenting cell
responsiveness, the second set of experiments were designed to enhance our
understanding of why antigen presenting cells, specifically monocytes and dendritic cells,
are more radioresistant than conventional T cells. Flow cytometric analysis of various
surface markers and intracellular signaling markers were used to examine the
mechanisms behind the radioresistance of antigen presenting cells. The experiments
described here showed a hierarchy of radiosensitivity among T cells, with naïve CD8 T
cells being the most radiosensitive and CD4 memory T cells being the most
radioresistant. Antigen presenting cells were found to be significantly more
?
radioresistant than T cell subsets (<10 fold decrease after radiation), and among APC,
monocytes were more radiosensitive than either total or conventional dendritic cells.
Furthermore APC expressed lower levels of Bax after radiation than T cells, and APC
subsets that expressed high levels were also more sensitive to radiation induced cell
death. These results demonstrate that T cell and APC subsets are dying by apoptosis after
radiation, and that the differential level of Bax expression is an important determinant of
the relative radiosensitivity of these immune cell subsets. Again, these findings are
clinically relevant to transplant patients and patients with tumors receiving radiation
therapy since APC survival may have importance for the generation of anti-tumor
immunity and post-transplantation immune sequelae such as GVHD. In addition,
elucidation of the mechanism of death of APC and T cell subsets, as described in chapter
3, provides potential markers of cell death that can be correlated to good graft versus
tumor (GVT) effects versus bad (tumor recurrence and persistence) GVT effects. Thus,
understanding the mechanistic basis for radiation-induced changes in APC and the effect
of these changes on survival and function is essential for optimizing the use of radiation
in transplantation and tumor vaccine treatment protocols.
Vl
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful for this opportunity to thank my colleagues, friends, and family members
who have encouraged and supported me during this rigorous doctoral experience.
I extend sincerest gratitude to my research advisor Dr. Susan Knox, who, while
dealing with quite a number of challenges in her personal life, was willing to take me on
as a graduate student. Dr. Knox gave me the opportunity to grow as an independent
scientist. I am a better researcher today because of her confidence in me.
I also wish to thank the members of my dissertation committee for their guidance
and support: Dr. Karlene Cimprich, Dr. James Ferrell, Dr. Garry Nolan, and Dr. Samuel
Strober. Dr. Cimprich, who graciously agreed to join my thesis committee during the last
year, contributed her expertise on DNA damage. My department chair Dr. Ferrell not
only welcomed me into the Chemical and Systems Biology Department, but was willing
to serve on my committee. Dr. Nolan's knowledge and advice helped strengthen my
project significantly.
It was my good fortune to have Dr. Samuel Strober as one of my mentors. Over
the last four years, Dr. Strober took the time to provide me with valuable, thorough, and
critical feedback. He challenged me to think more, work harder, write better, and to make
sure that my research interpretations were solid and clearly presented so that they could
be understood by anyone. It was an honor and a privilege to work with and learn from
such a knowledgeable and well respected scientist. The lessons I have learned from Dr.
vii
Straber will remain with me throughout my career. I am a far better scientist because of
him.
Thank you to Dr. Jennifer Jones, a postdoctoral scholar in the lab, whose
willingness to mentor and ability to give articulate, analytical comments about a talk or
paper should be a model for every graduate student. Dr. Jones was a vital part of my
training, and I will be forever grateful to her.
Thank you to my dear friend Dr. Alice Banh, a member of a neighboring lab, who
was always willing to help me in any way she could. She would often stay late just so I
would not have to be in the laboratory by myself. She has been a wonderful friend, both
inside and outside of laboratory; and I could not imagine these last few years without her.
I am also grateful to the rest of the Susan Knox laboratory members, Dr.
Junquiang Tian and Dr. Shoucheng Ning, for their willingness to help me whenever
needed; and to the other members of the neighboring labs, Dr. Jing Zhang and Dr. Peiwen
Kuo, who made every day in lab entertaining.
I am definitely grateful to the outstanding Stanford Medical Scientist Training
Program which funded my education and provided activities designed to help me grow as
a physician scientist. Special thanks to Lorie Langdon who always made sure I had
funding for my research and literally knew the answer to nearly every question I asked
her. The program and the students would be lost without her.
Additionally, to my countless friends both inside and outside of the medical
school and my research department, I thank you for your unfailing encouragement and
support.
viii
My family has been my rock! An enormous thank is reserved for my parents,
Henry and Pamela Parker, for their unwavering love and support and willingness to do
whatever it took to make it possible for me to focus on my education and be successful. I
had several mishaps with computers over the years, but my daddy always made sure I had
a working computer during my PhD training and was willing to look up any information
that I needed to help me along in this process. I thank him for listening to me ramble on
about my ideas and for providing valuable input. Thanks to my mommy for her words of
wisdom on how to make it through a PhD program. She always seemed to know exactly
what to say to silence my worries and fears. It was great to have a parent to talk to who
has been through this experience. A really big thanks to my granny, Vaneater K. Peery,
who simply wanted me to be happy no matter what I decided to do with my life. My daily
talks with her kept me going and kept me laughing. Thanks to my granddaddy, Edward L.
Peery, Sr., and my brother, Ronald Martin, for their constant encouragement and support.
Last, but definitely not least, I would like to dedicate this dissertation to my
guardian angel - my favorite uncle, Edward L. Peery, Jr., who very recently passed away.
I thank him for his unconditional love and enduring faith in my abilities. I know he is
smiling down from heaven on me and would love to be here to celebrate my success.
IX
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 : Introduction 1
Ionizing Radiation Cellular Effects 1
Ionizing Radiation as a Cytotoxic Agent 3
Radiotherapy and Immunotherapy Combined 4
Ionizing Radiation and Antigen Presenting Cells 8
Ionizing Radiation Effects on the Immune System 12
Monocytes and U937 Cell Line 14
Nuclear Factor Kappa B 16
Chapter 2: Characterization of Radiation-Induced Immune Signaling Changes
In Antigen Presenting Cells 23
Introduction 25
Materials and Methods 29
Results: Radiation (XRT) Induces phosphorylation of NFkB
members 38
ROS levels contribute to XRT-induced NEMO phosphorylation 39
XRT-induced phosphorylation of NEMO requires ATM 41
??2?? and NEMO phosphorylation patterns correlate after XRT ... 42
NFkB pathway is necessary for maturation of U937 cells by
XRT 44
NBD peptide decreases U937 cell responsiveness 46
XRT activates and enhances U937 cell response: Cytokine
production increases in T cells after XRT 47
XRT enhances APC function which is dependent upon activation
ofNEMO 49
NBD peptide decreases Monocyte and Dendritic Cell
Responsiveness 51
XRT activates and enhances Monocyte and Dendritic Cell
response in a NEMO dependent manner 53
Effect of allogeneic MLR on cytokine positive T Cells,
Monocytes and Dendritic Cells 54
Discussion 56
Figures 63
References 76
Supplemental Figures 84
Chapter 3: Differential Bax Expression is a Determinant of Radiosensitivity
in T Cell and Antigen Presenting Cell Subsets 98
Abstract 98
Introduction 99
Materials and Methods 1 02
Results: Effect of irradiation on different T Cell subsets from
healthy donor human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) 105
Radiation changes the T cell subset balance to favor memory
CD4+ T cells 106
xi
Effect of irradiation on different APC subsets from healthy
donor human PBMC 107
Increased cleaved PARP activity indicates T cells die by
apoptosis and their radiosensitivity could be due to lack of
???a Activity 108
Decreased PARP activity and increased ???a activity may
contributes to APC radioresistance 110
CD8+ T Cells are more sensitive to radiation-induced apoptosis
than CD4+ T Cells Ill
Conventional Dendritic Cells are slightly more radioresistant
than Monocytes 113
Radiation increased Expression of Bax in T cell subsets while
Bcl-2 expression remained relatively constant 114
Effect of radiation on Bax and Bcl-2 expression in APC
Subsets 116
Increase in Bax expression as compared to Bax/Bcl-2 expression
after irradiation makes CD8 T Cells more radiosensitive than
CD4 T cells 119
Bax expression as compared to Bax/Bcl-2 expression is significantly
less in conventional dendritic cells and monocytes 121
Discussion 124
Figures 129
References 142
xii
Supplemental Figures 148
Chapter 4: Summary and Future Research 156
Summary 156
Future Research 162
Chapter 4: General References 169
XlIl
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Figure 1 Chapter 1 : Four outcomes of DNA Damage 2
Figure 2 Chapter 1 : Overview of radiation's modulation of the immune
System 13
Figure 1 Chapter 2: Phospho-flow cytometry determines phospho-specific
changes in NFkB pathway resulting from XRT and Doxorubicin in
U937 cells 63
Figure 2 Chapter 2: ROS levels modestly contribute to XRT-induced
phosphorylation of NEMO 64
Figure 3 Chapter 2: Phosphorylation of NEMO after XRT and Doxorubicin
Requires ATM 65
Figure 4 Chapter 2: XRT-induced maturation and responsiveness of
U937 cells NFkB 67
Figure 5 Chapter 2: Supernatants from allogeneic MLR demonstrate XRT
enhances TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine production, but not IL-4 68
Figure 6 Chapter 2: APC Increased CD80 and CD86 expression and
responsiveness after XRT is dependent on NEMO activation in
allogeneic MLR 69
Figure 7 Chapter 2: Responsiveness after XRT is dependent on NEMO
activation in allogeneic MLR cultures from whole blood 71
Figure 8 Chapter 2: XRT enhances Monocyte and Conventional Dendritic
Cell response: supernatants from allogeneic MLR demonstrate XRT
xiv
enhances TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine production in a NEMO dependent
manner, but not IL-4 73
Figure 9 Chapter 2: XRT-induced activation of NFkB pathway requires
ATM, but not ROS in U937 cells 75
Cell Responsiveness in allogeneic MLR 82
Supplemental Figure 1 Chapter 2: XRT-induced phosphorylation of
NEMO and NFkB 84
Supplemental Figure 2 Chapter 2: Redox-modulatory agents BSO
and NAC effect on GSH levels and histograms of BSO and NAC
on XRT-induced phosphorylation of NEMO 86
Supplemental Figure 3 Chapter 2: Kinetics of Ku 55933 effects on
XRT-induced phosphorylation of CHK2, CHKl, and DNA-PK 87
Supplemental Figure 4 Chapter 2: Correlation between ??2?? and
NEMO phosphorylation profiles after XRT 88
Supplemental Figure 5 Chapter 2: XRT-induced phosphorylation of
NEMO and NFkB is p53 independent 89
Supplementary Figure 6 Chapter 2: Doxorubicin-induced phosphorylation
of NEMO and NFkB pathway is p53 independent 90
Supplementary Figure 7 Chapter 2: XRT increases expression of
co-stimulatory and MHC molecules on U937 cells 91
Supplementary Figure 8 Chapter 2: Intracellular cytokines TNF-a,
IFN-?, and IL-4 are produced by CD4+ T cells in allogeneic MLR 93
xv
Supplementary Figure 9 Chapter 2: Increased CD80 and CD86
expression by Monocytes after XRT is dependent on NEMO activation
in allogeneic MLR 94
Supplementary Figure 10 Chapter 2: IFN-? and IL-4 are produced by
CD4+ T cells and TNF-a by monocytes in allogeneic MLR 95
Supplementary Figure 1 1 Chapter 2: TNF-a, IFN-? and IL-4 are
produced by CD4+ T cells in allogeneic MLR 96
Figure 1 Chapter 3: Effect of irradiation on CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
subsets 129
Figure 2 Chapter 3: Effect of irradiation on naïve (CD45RA+CD62L+)
and memory (CD45RACD62L) CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 131
Figure 3 Chapter 3: Effect of irradiation on APC subsets 132
Figure 4 Chapter 3: Radiation does not induce IkBa in T cells and
CD8+ T cells display greater sensitivity (greater cleaved PARP) than
CD4+ T cells to radiation 134
Figure 5 Chapter 4: APC are more radioresistant (decreased cleaved
PARP) than T cell subsets and their radioresistance could be due to
increased ???a activity 136
Figure 6 Chapter 4: CD8+ T cells are more radiosesnsitive than CD4+ T
cells as indicated by greater activation of Bax and TUNEL 138
Figure 7 Chapter 4: Conventional dendritic cells are slightly more
radioresistant than monocytes as indicated by greater activation of Bax
and TUNEL 140
XV i
Supplementary Figure 1 Chapter 3: Irradiation increased expression of
Bax in T cell subsets while Bcl-2 expression remained relatively constant 148
Supplementary Fifiure 2 Chapter 3: Irradiation slightly increased expression
of Bax in APC cell subsets while Bcl-2 expression remained relatively
constant 150
Supplementary Figure 3 Chapter 3: Greater Bax+ COS+ T cells
(than CD4+ T cells) compared to T cell Bax+Bcl-2+ expression could
explain greater radiosensitivity of CD8 T cells 152
Supplementary Figure 4 Chapter 3: Greater Bax+ monocyte expression
(than Conventional Dendritic Cells) compared to APC Bax+Bcl-2+
expression after irradiation could explain greater radiosensitivity
of Monocytes 154
Figure 1 Chapter 4: Overview of radiation-induced signaling changes in
APC 159
XVIl
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Radiation induced changes in mitochondrial mediated caspase
apoptotic pathway in immune cell subsets 157
Table 2: Radiation induced PMBC subset changes and predicted
clinical outcomes 161
XVlIl
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Ionizing Radiation Cellular Effects
Ionizing radiation has many cellular effects which ultimately lead to cell death
(apoptosis), effects on cell cycle, activation ofDNA repair mechanisms, changes in gene
expression, activation of signal transduction pathways, and mutations which leads to
genomic instability (Halperin et al., 2008). Exposure of tumor cells to ionizing radiation
causes DNA damage and mitochondrial-dependent generation of reactive oxygen species
which cause DNA-damage and result in DNA breaks (Kitagawa and Kastan 2005). This
DNA damage caues changes in chromatin which results in autophosphorylation ofAtaxia
Telangiectasia Mutant (ATM) dimers and in turn, results in the release ofphosphorylated
and active ATM monomers. These monomers can phosphorylate other substrates
(Kitagawa and Kastan 2005; Xu 2006). DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is
activated early by DNA damage while ATM and Rad3- related protein (ATR) isactivated
later. Activation ofthese sensor proteins in turn promotes the activation of receptors and
intracellular signaling pathways and stimulates cell cycle checkpoints, p53 activity, and
DNA repair mechanisms (Meyn et al. 1996; Robles et al. 2001). P53 plays a role in cell
cycle arrest and is necessary for DNA repair. It also initiates apoptosis through both
mitochondrial and death receptor pathways by upregulating Bax, Bad, and death receptor
(CD95) ligand expression ((Burns, Bernhard, and El-Deiry 2001; Guan et al. 2001; Herr
et al. 1997; Sheard et al. 1997; Zhou and Elledge 2000).
1
\XRT ? DNA Damage
Sensors
Transducers
Effectors
Signal
Transduction
DNA repair " f ^W^^¡¡/ ÍP» A_0-„L uz «I Transcription
Cell Cycle
Transitions
poptosis
Figure 1. Four outcomes ofDNA damage
Radiation-induced apoptosis can also occur via the c-Jun N-terminal kinase
signaling pathway (Chen, Meyer, and Tan 1996; Chen et al. 1996; Verheij et al. 1998;
Zanke et al. 1996) which is initiated by activation of acidic sphingomyelinase and
increased the production of ceramide (generated from free-radical damage to lipid
membrane) (Cock et al. 1998; Cremesti et al. 2001; Herr et al. 1997; Radford 1999;
Tepper et al. 1999). Ceramide release leads to activation of receptor and nonreceptor
tyrosine kinases and the activation of downstream signal transduction pathways. The
generation of ROS and ceramide production also contribute to the other radiation-
mediated effects.
2
used in allogeneic hematopoetic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) protocols for treatment
ofvarious hereditary and malignant diseases for decades (Main and Prehn 1955). HSCT
is an important cornerstone of leukemia and lymphoma treatment, especially for high risk
recurrent disease. However, the morbidity and mortality associated with myeloablative
radiation used in stem cell transplantation has been a barrier to using HSCT as adoptive
immunotherapy for most hematologic and other diseases.
Radiotherapy and Immunotherapy Combined
Total lymphoid irradiation (TLI) (radiation that selectively irradiates the primarily
lymph node bearing regions and spleen), was the first utilized for treatment ofHodgkin' s
disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (Hoppe 1987); Kaplan 1980). TLI was the first
non-myleoablative host-conditioning regimen shown to induce tolerance and mixed
chimerism following MHC-mismatched bone marrow transplantation in various animals
(Slavin et al. 1978; Slavin et al. 1979; Straber et al. Transplantation tolerance after total
lymphoid irradiation 1979; Straber et al. Allograft tolerance after total lymphoid
irradiation (tli) 1979; Waer et al. 1990). During and immediately after TLI there are
alterations in the proportions ofT-cell subsets in the peripheral lymphoid system (Field
and Straber 2001). Furthermore, when TLI is used with anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG),
there are graft versus leukemic or lymphoma (GVL) benefits without the risk of acute
graft versus host disease (GVHD). This is due to an increase in regulatory NKT cells,
which act as "natural suppressors" that are present immediately post-transplantation (Lan
et al. 2003; Lan et al. 2001). The same concept ofTLI+ATG in preventing acute GVHD
4
Ionizing Radiation as a Cytotoxic Agent
Ionizing radiation has cytotoxic effects or the ability to kill cancer cells, thereby
making it an important modality in the treatment of cancer and eradication oftumors.
Different cell types and tissues possess different sensitivities to radiation. In general,
actively proliferating cells are most sensitive to radiation since the mitotic activity of all
cells decreases with maturation and cellular radiosensitivity tends to be inversely related
to cell differentiation. Furthermore, the sensitivity of an organ depends on the relative
sensitivity of the tissues and cells that make up the organ. Thus some tumors, depending
on their cellular and tissue composition, are more sensitive to radiation than others (Perez
and Brady 1998). Though ionizing radiation results in the elimination of the more
radiosensitive fraction ofcancer cells present within a tumor at the time of radiation
exposure, no significant correlation exists between responsiveness of a tumor to
irradiation and radiocurability (Halperin et al. 2008).
Lymphoid organs and bone marrow are among the most sensitive tissues in the
body to direct radiation injury (Halperin et al. 2008). Total-body irradiation leads to a
drastic fall in the number ofcirculating B and T lymphocytes whereas macrophages
which give rise to monocytes, are less radiosensitive than lymphocytes (Hall and Giaccia
2006). The sensitivity of lymphoid organs and bone marrow to radiation has been
exploited, with radiation being used both a cytotoxic agent and to suppress the immune
response (e.g. to inhibit effects of antigen presentation to immunologically competent
cells). Thus, the cytotoxic and immunosuppressive properties of radiation have been
3
and promoting GVL after HSCT was tested in humans. Lowsky, initial reported results
from thirty-seven patients with malignant lymphoid diseases or acute leukemia treated
with a regimen ofTLI+ATG, which was followed by an infusion ofHLA-matched
peripheral-blood mononuclear cells from related or unrelated donors. Only two of these
patients had acute GVHD and anti-tumor effects of GVL contributed to the increase in
the complete remission rate (2005). Furthermore, radiation for lymphodepletion and/or
myeloablation also has utility for the induction of solid organ allograft tolerance (Fuks
and Slavin 1981; Scandling et al. 2008), and autoimmune diseases (Fuks and Slavin
1981; Straber 1987).
Immunotherapy clinical applications for cancer have progressed to include: the
adoptive transfer ofanti-tumor reactive T cells (cytotoxic T lymphocytes) (Demaria et al.
Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership 2005; Paulos et al.
2007); the use oftherapeutic vaccines(Antonia, Mule, and Weber 2004; Luznik et al.
2003); strategies based on dendritic cells, strategies based on cytokines; and antibodies
that promote tumor-specific T cell activation (Demaria et al. Immune-mediated inhibition
ofmetastases after treatment with local radiation and ctla-4 blockade in a mouse model of
breast cancer 2005). Though there are currently immunotherapy trials in the clinic
focused on eradicating advanced tumors in patients, radiation therapy also has a possible
role ofenhancing overall tumor immunogenicity.
Radiation is also being combined with different modalities to enhance the anti-
tumor response. Examples ofpreclinical studies ofradiotherapy combined with
immunotherapy are described here. One example involves combined radiotherapy and
immunotherapy strategies that are based upon dendritic cells. Fms-like tyrosine kinase
5
receptor 3 ligand (Flt3-L) is a growth factor which stimulates production of dendritic
cells and has been shown to induce antitumor immunity to mouse tumors in combination
with radiation (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived
partnership 2005; Lynch et al. 1997; Maraskovsky et al. 1996). The first study that tested
the combination ofFlt3-L and local high-dose (60Gy) radiation therapy used the Lewis
lung model mice ofmetastastic carcinoma and found that lung metastases were inhibited
and disease free-survival was enhanced as compared to mice that were treated with
radiation therapy or Flt3-L alone (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and
immunotherapy: A revived partnership 2005). Another study showed that local tumor
irradiation could be combined with IL-2 (cytokine that promotes T cell proliferation)
and/or adoptive transfer oftumor-infiltrating lymphocytes to obtain a synergistic anti
tumor effect (Cameron, Spiess, and Rosenberg 1990; Demaria et al. Combining
radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership 2005). Other cytokines have
also been studied in combination with radiation such as IL-3, IL-12, and TNFa (Antonia,
Mule, and Weber 2004; Chiang et al. 2000; Chiang et al. 1997; Eder, Geissler, and
Ganser 1997; Oh et al. 2004). There are also strategies that target Toll-like receptors
(TLR's). TLR's can result in dramatic immune responses including the induction of
cytokines, activation ofnatural killer cells, and elicitation of strong T cell responses when
dendritic cells and B cells are activated. Oligodeoxynucleotides that contain CpG motifs
and bind to TLR 9 have been shown to enhance anti-tumor immunity (Krieg 2004).
Administration of CpG oligodeoxynucloetides actually has a synergistic effect with local
radiation and was able to control tumor growth in solitary tumors of immunogenic
sarcoma (Fsa) in mice. Finally, studies have examined the use ofantibody-mediated
6
blockade ofthe CTLA-4 (Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte Antigen 4) molecules. CTLA-4
molecules are expressed on the surface ofHelper T cells and transmit an inhibitor signal
to T cells. Blockade of CTL-4 alone did not affect primary tumor growth and metastatic
spread in a mouse 4Tl adenocarcinoma (metastatic breast cancer) model. However,
combined radiation therapy with CTL-4 blockade induced a CD8+ T cell-mediated
antitumor response. This combination inhibited metastases outside the irradiated field
and increased the overall survival of the mice (Antonia, Mule, and Weber 2004).
The use of radiotherapy as a component of tumor vaccine strategies is an active
area of preclinical investigation. In the past, tumor vaccines alone often did not generate
a sufficient immune response to be efficacious and most tumors escaped immune
destruction. Radiation therapy in combination with vaccines may be a useful strategy for
enhancing tumor immunogenecity. In fact, a clinical study reported on the use of a
recombinant cancer vaccine combined with radiotherapy in patients with localized
prostate cancer (Gulley et al. 2005; Gulley, Madan, and Arlen 2007) in which patients
who received radiation therapy between their fourth and sixth vaccinations showed
evidence of de novo generation ofT cells to prostate-associated antigens not present in
the vaccine. This provided indirect evidence of the induction of immunity to patient
tumor antigens (Gulley et al. 2005; Gulley, Madan, and Arlen 2007). Local radiation
therapy has also been strategically used as a component of a vaccine strategy in
combination with intratumoral CpG with some success (Brody et al. 2009). Recently,
there has also been interest in combining radiation therapy and immunotherapy in vaccine
protocols.
7
Therefore, effects of radiation on tumor responses and tumor immunity can be
related, and immune modulation is required for successful HSCT and to enhance the
efficacy of anti-tumor therapy treatments.
Ionizing Radiation andAntigen Presenting Cells
The danger model of immunity proposed by Matzinger is relevant to the study of
radiation effects. This model suggests that antigen presenting cells are activated by
danger or alarm signals from injured cells , (e.g. in response to exposure to pathogens,
toxins, or mechanical damage) (Matzinger 1994, 2002). Furthermore, these "danger
signals" emitted from tissues comprise cytokines, chemokines, inflammatory mediators,
and heat-shock proteins which induce maturation and activation of antigen presenting
cells (Gallucci and Matzinger 2001; McBride et al. 2004; McLellan, Brocker, and
Kampgen 2000).
Radiation eliciting "danger signals" can affect innate and adaptive immunity
(comprised ofhumoral and cell immunity). Innate immunity is mainly antigen
nonspecific and is comprised ofphysical barriers, soluble factors (complement and
chemokines), and effector cells which include natural killer cells, monocytes, and
macrophages (Clark et al. 2000; Delves and Roitt The immune system. First of two parts
2000, The immune system. Second of two parts 2000). In contrast adaptive immunity is
antigen-specific and involves antigen recognition and capture, processing, presentation,
lymphocyte function, and immunologic memory (Delves and Roitt The immune system.
First of two parts 2000, The immune system. Second oftwo parts 2000). Antigen-
8
presenting cells serve as the critical link between innate and adaptive immunity
(Hartgers, Figdor, and Adema 2000).
Antigen presenting cells are vital to the induction and regulation of antigen-
specific cellular immune responses. Dendritic cells (DC) are bone marrow-derivied
mononuclear cells found in blood and many peripheral tissues (O'Neill, Adams, and
Bhardwaj 2004). DC are a heterogeneous population of cells produced in the bone
marrow in response to growth and differentiation factors. There are three stages of
differentiation for all DC subtypes: DC precursors, immature DC, and mature DC
(O'Neill, Adams, and Bhardwaj 2004; Shortman and Liu 2002). In human blood,
immature DC and DC precursors are lineage-negative (CD3XD14XD19XD56-) HLA-
DR+ mononuclear cells (Banchereau et al. 2000) and are divided into 2 populations that
are considered conventional or non-conventional. These populations are separated by
staining with antibodies to CDl Ic and CD 123 (interleukin 3 receptor ?). CDl Ic+CD 123"
DC have amonocytoid appearance and are called myeloid DC (MDC), whereas CDl Ic-
CD123+ DC have morphologic features similar to plasma cells and are called
plasmacytoid DC (PDC). Although commonly used, this nomenclature is somewhat
misleading. Experiments in mice indicate that both DC populations can be derived from
Flt3-expressing myeloid and lymphoid progenitors (D'Amico and Wu 2003; Karsunky et
al. 2003; O'Neill, Adams, and Bhardwaj 2004). The plasmacytoid DC are important in
innate and antiviral immunity, are found primarily in blood and lymphoid organs, and are
the principal interferon o(IFN<*)-producing cells in the body. Plasmacytoid DC can
activate antitumor and antiviral antigen responses (Fonteneau et al. 2004; Salio et al.
2003) but they are difficult to obtain in sufficient quantities so their role in immune
9
modulation and immunotherapy has not been well studied. Myeloid DC are found in
tissues besides blood and lymphoid organs and are capable ofcapturing and presenting
antigens and producing cytokines, primarily TNF (Iwasaki and Medzhitov 2004).
Dendritic cells capture antigens best when they are "immature". When they
undergo differentiation and become mature, they become cells specialized for T cell
stimulation. Immature DC capture bacteria, viruses, dead or dying cells, proteins, and
immune complexes through phagocytosis, endocytosis, and pinocytosis. Dendritic cells
process the captured proteins that are loaded onto major histocompatibility complex class
I (MHC Class I) molecules expressed by most nucleated cells and major
histocompatibility complex class II (MHC class II) molecules expressed by monocytes,
macrophages, dendritic cells and B cells molecules. These peptide-MHC complexes are
transported to the cell surface for recognition by antigen-specific T cells. The molecules
MHC I and MHC II are recognized by CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, respectively
(Guermonprez et al. 2002). Antigens can be acquired endogenously, meaning they are
derived from intracellular proteins which are then processed and loaded onto MHC I
(Thery and Amigorena 2001 ; Watts and Amigorena 2000). Interaction ofthe MHC
molecule with the TCR allows cytotoxic lymphocytes, in the presence of IFNy and IL-2
secretion from helper T cells, to proliferate and attack cells expressing particular antigen
recognized by these cells. The killing ofthese target cells takes place through the
perforin/granzyme-B or death receptor (Fas/FasL) mediated apoptosis (O'Neill, Adams,
and Bhardwaj 2004). Antigens acquired exogenously or from the extracellular
environment are processed onto MHC ?. Peptides are also processed by the exogenous
pathway which utilizes extracellular antigen taken up by APC. These proteins are
10
processeci into peptide fragments and loaded onto MHC Class II molecules (Delamarre,
Holcombe, and Mellman 2003). This antigen MHC complex is presented on the APC
surface where it is recognized by an antigen-specific TCR of a CD4+ helper T cell which
drives the T cell to secrete cytokines.
There is also a pathway called cross presentation that allows DC to process
exogenous antigens on MHC Class I molecules. An alternative pathway also exists
whereby DCs process exogenous antigens onto MHC I. This pathway allows APC to
induce CD8+ and CD4+ T-cell responses to exogenous antigens like apoptotic or necrotic
tumor cells, virus-infected cells, heath shock proteins, DNA or PvNA encoded antigens,
organisms like bacteria, viruses, virus like particles, exosomes, and soluble proteins
(Fonteneau, Larsson, and Bhardwaj 2002; Guermonprez et al. 2003; Guermonprez et al.
2002). Cross-presentation is the primary way tumor antigens are presented to T cells
(Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership
2005). Furthermore, in order for T cells to become activated, engagement ofthe T cell
receptors with antigen bound to MHC class molecules and co-stimulatory signals is
required. During APC maturation there is increased expression ofMHC Class II, CD40,
CD80, and CD86. The interaction of CD28 on the cell with CD80 and CD86 provides
for this interaction (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A
revived partnership 2005).
11
Ionizing Radiation Effects on the Immune System
As above, radiation affects the immune system by eliciting the "danger response"
by playing a role in the process of antigen presentation and APC maturation, and thereby
immune activation. More specifically radiation induces cellular expression ofHLA-
molecules (MHC Class I and Class II) and co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86
(Liu et al. 2001; Morel et al. 1998; Sojka et al. 2000; Vereecque et al. 2000).
Furthermore, radiation induces expression of immunomodulatory cytokines such as IL-
lß, IL- 12, and TNFa which activate APC and cause proliferation ofAPC (Hallahan et al.
1989; Hong et al. 1999; Ishihara et al. 1993; Rieser et al. 1997; Rovere et al. 1998).
Radiation also upregulates heat shock protein such as gp96 and hsp70 on tumors, which
may have an effect on APC maturation and activation, as well as antigen transfer to APC
(Abdulkarim et al. 2000; Feng et al. 2001; Melkonyan, Ushakova, and Umansky 1995;
Somersan et al. 2001; Stammler and VoIm 1996); death receptors (CD95) and MHC class
I on tumors recognized by APC (Abdulkarim et al. 2000; Albanese and Dainiak 2000;
Belka et al. 1998; Jones et al. 2001; Nishioka et al. 1999; Ogawa and Ohashi 1997;
Sheard 2001). Radiation also induces inflammatory mediators such as COX-2 and
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which enhance the overall "danger milieu" with secondary
APC activation/maturation (Chen et al. 2001; Rieser et al. 1997; Steinauer et al. 2000).
Without these signals, immature APC present antigen to T cells in the absence of
necessary cytokines and costimulatory molecules, resulting in antigen-specific
immunologic tolerance. Since radiation has such important effects on the way APCs
respond, and thereby how T cells act, understanding the mechanisms responsible for
12
radiation mediated modulation ofthe immune response is necessary for optimizing
transplantation and anti-tumor protocols that use radiation. Radiation's elicitation of
these "danger signals" in the microenvironment, not only results in activation and
maturation ofdendritic cells, increased antigen presentation, and enhanced tendency of
tumor cells to either die or be recognized (Friedman 2002; Teitz-Tennenbaum et al.
2008), but it facilitates homing ofboth antigen-presenting and effector T cells to the
tumor by chemokine release from the tumor cells (Ganss et al. 2002; Nikitina and
Gabrilovich 2001; Zong et al. 2006). Radiation also causes upregulation ofadhesion
molecules such as CD31, CD54, CD62E, CD62P, CD 144, CD 106 on tumors which
promote leukocyte adhesion Chemotaxis.
/\
/*>^ ???O:?????:???? ? ineuüitoi*Tumor HSPs
Vasculature TumorIiiflainmatoi-v cvtokmes
Stroma \<üiesion moierules
Co-stimulatory reeentois
MHC molmiles
Dentil rerentoi
"T^SJ? (V\ \
JAp opToas
A» o^VNWTÔJaS BCTL/5 Nl/\ / RiHC Claw 1'/' \<¡> „*
^;**tí"".» *%„*«?>»« "i..»* V V
Tûr
JMHC CUnÔ HHpti T tell
Figure 2. Overview ofradiation 's modulation ofthe immune system.
Radiation damage to tumor, vasculature, and stroma results in cellular apotosis
and necrosis. Radiation upregulates expression of inflammatory mediators, heat shock
13
proteins, inflammatory cytokines, adhesion molecules, costimulatory receptors, death
receptors, and MHC molecules which comprises the "danger" microenvironment.
Immature DC traffic to this area and phagocytose apoptotic and necrotic debris and
mature DC migrate to lymph nodes where processed antigen is presented to T cells via
exogenous or cross-presentation antigen processing pathways. CD4+ T helper cells are
activated after interacting with the MHC Class II/antigen complex and subsequently
induce CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (CTL's) to promote cytolysis. CTL's also interact with
MHC Class I/antigen complex to induce an antigen-specific cytolytic attack.
Monocytes and U937 Cell Line
While dendritic cells are the most potent of the antigen presenting cells,
monocytes also play an important role in the induction and regulation of antigen-specific
responses. Monocytes have important regulatory and effector roles in innate and
adapative immunity and are the precursors for macrophages in tissues (Dale, Boxer, and
Liles 2008). Monocytes also serve as precursors to dendritic cells. Studies have found
dendritic cells as the terminal stage ofmonocyte differentiation following stimulation (+
of GM-CSF/IL-4) (Palucka et al. 1998). Monocytes have Fc receptors and express the
IgG receptor FcyRI (CD64) constitutively. Monocytes and their differentiated progeny
play important regulatory and effector roles in innate and adaptive immunity (Medzhitov
and Janeway 2000; Unanue 1980). Monocytes have three major functions which include
presentation of antigens, phaocytosis, and immunomodulation. Activated monocytes and
macrophages also release cytokines such as IL-I, IL-6, TNF, and INF-cr/ß that play a role
14
in regulating hematopoiesis. Monocytes are also subject to immune modulation by
chemokines. Monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells express microbial pattern-
recognition receptors that recognize and detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns,
resulting in their activation. A well-known group ofthese receptors are the Toll-like
receptors (Brightbill et al. 1999; Medzhitov and Janeway 1997; Trinchieri and Sher
2007). Upon binding of specific ligands, TLRs signal via a pathway to activate Nuclear
Factor Kappa B (NFkB) and stimulate proinflammatory cytokine production from
monocytes and macrophages (Medzhitov et al. 1998).
There are also human in-vitro cell lines which function as
monocytes/macrophages. U937 cells, derived from a histocytic lymphoma, exhibit
monocyte morphology, and function as APCs (Sundstrom and Nilsson 1976). U937
cells have been shown to be activated and pushed to terminal monocytic differentiation
by: phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) (Harris and Ralph 1985; Kaneko, Ikeda, and
Nakanishi 1999), supernatants from human mixed lymphocyte cultures, phorbol esters,
vitamin D3, gamma interferon, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and retinoic acid (Koren,
Anderson, and Larrick 1979; Olsson et al. 1983). They also express a basal level of
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II and co-stimulatory molecules
(CD86) as shown via FACS, with upregulation ofMHC class II and I and co-stimulatory
molecules after stimulation (Buggins et al. 1999; Passmore, Lukey, and Ress 2001).
U937 cells also express adhesion molecules ICAM-I (CD54), LFA-I (CDlIa), and Mac-
1 (CDl lb) (Buggins et al. 1999). Furthermore, they have the ability to phagocytose and
present mycobacterial antigens to HLA-I class matched cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(Passmore, Lukey, and Ress 2001).
15
An in-depth understanding ofhow radiation affects APC is crucial since these
cells are responsible for the induction and regulation of antigen-specific responses. To
date, the molecular mechanisms by which radiation affects immune responses have not
been well studied. This is particularly important for early events in specific APC subsets
that ultimately affect antigen presentation and APC maturation/activation.
The NFkB pathway is one ofthe signaling pathways activated by radiation in
tumor cells. It plays an improtant role in the apoptotic response (whether or not this role
is anti-apoptotic or pro-apoptotic depends on the cell type) as well as in the maintenance
and regulation ofthe immune system.
Nuclear Factor Kappa B
One of the primary roles ofNFkB is in the immune system. The transcriptional
gene products that are characteristic of early events in the immune responses often result
in the activation and modulation ofNFkB. Therefore, NFkB mediates several critical
changes that are characteristic of innate and adaptive immune responses (Hayden, West,
and Ghosh 2006). NFkB' s role in innate immunity is mediated through induction of
genes encoding cytokines, chemokines, enzymes, and antimicrobial peptides (Ghosh and
Karin 2002; Schmitz, Bacher, and Dienz 2003; Zhang and Ghosh 2000). In addition,
NFkB's roles in adaptive immunity include its antiapoptotic effects (controls survival of
B cells, T cells, monocytes, and dendritic cells (Steinauer et al. 2000), induced expression
ofMHC proteins, costimulatory molecules such as B7.1 (CD80), and cytokines such as
IL-2, IL- 12 and IFN-y. Thus, NFkB effects cell differentiation, DC development, and
16
cell proliferation (Hayden, West, and Ghosh 2006), making it an important pathway for
the study ofAPC function/responsiveness after radiation .
The NFkB family is composed of five related transcription factors: p50, p52,
ReIA (aka p65), c-Rel and ReIB. These transcription factors share a highly conserved ReI
Homology Domain (RH), which contains sequences for dimerization allowing them to
form homodimers or heterodimers and bind to a variety oftarget DNA sequences, also
known as kB sites, to modulate gene expression (Hayden, West, and Ghosh 2006; Magne
et al. 2006). ReIA, c-Rel, and ReIB also contain C-terminal transcription activation
domains (TADs), which enable them to activate target gene expression. In the classical or
canonical pathway, NFkB complexes are inactive in most cells. They reside in the
cytoplasm in a complex with inhibitory IkB proteins (in particular DcBa). When the
pathway is activated, NFkB activation is mediated by an IkB kinase complex (DCK).
The IKK complex consists of two catalytically active kinases (DCKa and DCKb) and a
regulatory scaffold protein, NFkB Essential Modulator (NEMO). Phopshorylation and
activation ofNEMO is critical to phosphorylation and activation of DCKa and DCKb.
Activation ofthis complex leads to phosphorylation of IkBa. IkBa is in turn degraded,
NFkB is phosphorylated and enters the nuclear to modulate target gene expression.
(Hayden, West, and Ghosh 2006; Magne et al. 2006; Scheidereit 2006). In the canonical
pathway, DCKb and NEMO are required for the activation of the p50/p65 complex
whereas DCKa is relatively dispensable. In the non-canonical pathway, DCKa solely
controls the activation of complexes that are inhibited by the DcB protein ? 100. Both
pathways are activated by distinct sets of stimuli and target distinct genes.
17
In addition, NFkB is an important regulator of apoptosis (Magne et al. 2006).
This was demonstrated in several studies where inactivation ofNFkB or NEMO resulted
in increased apoptotic sensitivity of cells to various stimuli or stressors (Bottero et al.
2001; Van Antwerp et al. 1996; Wang, Mayo, and Baldwin 1996) or cell killing . NFkB
also regulates anti-apoptotic genes by interfering with apoptotic signaling. A well known
example is in the TNF receptor I signaling pathway. In this pathway TNF receptor is
coupled to the caspase cascade via the FADD adaptor. However, TNF also activates
NFkB via TRADD and TRAF adaptors. NFkIcB induces transcription of genes that code
for anti-apoptotic proteins like c-IAPl and 2 which block caspase function directly or
indirectly (Deveraux and Reed 1999). NFkB also plays a role in the mitochondrial-
mediated apoptotic pathway as it transcribes the genes coding for several anti-apoptotic
proteins (Chen et al. 2002; Deveraux and Reed 1999). NFkB has been shown to interfere
with the induction ofbax in carcinomas (Bentires-Alj et al. 2001). It can also promote or
amplify cell death by inducing genes that code for the death receptor Fas or its ligand
FasL. This is the case during elimination ofactivated T cells in the Activation-Induced
Cell Death response (Ravi, Bedi, and Fuchs 1998).
NFkB and p53 can have opposite functions as was shown in a study where
Oncogenic Ras initiated a p53 -independent apoptotic response that was suppressed
through the activation ofNFkB (Bellas, Lee, and Sonenshein 1995; Mayo et al. 1997).
These two transcription factors seem to compete for interaction with transcriptional co-
activators (Ravi, Bedi, and Fuchs 1998; Wadgaonkar et al. 1999). However, another
study showed that p53 can be induced by NFkB and that activation ofNFkB correlated
18
with the ability ofp53 to induce apoptosis (Ryan et al. 2000). Overall, the interaction
between NFkB and p53 appears to be quite complex.
Importantly, NFkB is activated by radiation in tumors. For example, radiation
has been reported to induce activation ofNFkB and enhance DNA binding (p65 and p50)
approximately four fold in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells shown by electrophilic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) (Wang et al. [the nuclear factor kappa b activation: The key
step of cell proliferation in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer cells] 2005). In
another study, total body irradiation induced NFkB activation in intestinal epithelial cells
in a dose and time-dependent manner in gel supershift assays (Wang et al. 2004).
Inhibition ofNFkB has been studied as a means of radiosensitizing tumor cells
(Pajonk, Pajonk, and McBride 1999; Russell et al. 2002; Yang et al. 2000). In one study
HD-My-Z Hodgkin cells were treated with the proteasome inhibitor MG- 132, which
induced apoptosis in HD-My-Z cells and sensitized them to ionizing radiation (Pajonk,
Pajonk, and McBride 1999). In another study of a head and neck carcinoma cell line,
dexamethasone significantly decreased NFkB DNA-binding activity and enhanced
baseline apoptosis and radiosensitivity (Didelot et al. 2001). In contrast, the blockade of
NFkB activation with a super-repressor did not improve cell death of irradiated prostate
carcinoma or Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines (Magne et al. 2006).
Overall, NFkB 's role in regulation and development of the immune system and its
activation by genotoxic stress (radiation) in tumors make this pathway a prime candidate
for exploring acute radiation-induced signaling changes in APC. I hypothesized that
early events in the NFkB pathway functionally modify certain immune cells, particularly
radioresistant APC (that survive weeks longer than T cells after radiation), and performed
19
experiments to elucidate the poorly understood role of the NFkB pathway in radiation-
induced changes in APC.
The goal of this research (presented in chapter 2) was to characterize acute
radiation induced changes in a human monocytic cell line and human antigen presenting
cell subsets at the molecular and cellular level, and to identify markers associated with
effective immune modulation. Thus, the specific aims were to:
1) Utilize phospho-flow cytometry to identify phospho-specific changes
resulting from cell stress conditions in mutant p53 and wild-type p53
U937 cells.
2) Elucidate the mechanism ofaction for radiation-induced phosphor-
specific changes identified.
3) To determine the physiological and functional significance of
radiation-induced phosphor-specific signaling changes in antigen
presenting cells from healthy donor peripheral-blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC).
In attempting to understand how radiation affects the immune system and how
radiation modifies APC, it was important to determine what was responsible for the
greater radioresistance ofantigen presenting cells as compared to T cells. Furthermore,
20
dendritic cells are particularly clinically relevant since they survive and are present in the
early post-transplant period.
Although it is known that APC are relatively radioresistant, it is not known why
antigen presenting cells, in particular monocytes and dendritic cells are more
radioresistant than conventional T cells (e.g. role of the mitochondrial-mediated apoptotic
pathway in this radioresistance has not been studied). I hypothesized that the selective
difference (i.e. differences in sensitivity to radiation) in T cell subsets after radiation
would be due to variation in the expression ofBax and there would be a selective
difference in APC subsets after radiation due to varying Bax expression as well. The
primary objectives of the experiments described in chapter 4 were to:
1) Further elucidate radiation-induced changes in the balance ofhuman T
cell subsets including CD4+ and CD8+ total T cells, CD4-CD8- T cells,
CD4+ naïve and memory T cells, and CD8 naive and memory T cells.
2) Determine if there is a selective difference in human APC subsets
including monocyte and dendritic cells after radiation.
3) Analyze the role ofBax and Bcl-2 expression in the relative
radioresistance of antigen presenting cells.
In the past, changes at the molecular level have been difficult to elucidate using
standard biochemical analysis techniques due to low numbers ofPBMC subsets after
21
radiation treatment. As a result, I used the phospho-flow cytometry technique for the
majority ofhuman immune cell subset studies. Phospho-flow cytometry allows for rapid
and accurate analysis of the phosphorylation state ofproteins within immune cellular
subsets in complex, heterogenous populations, post-irradiation, to be analyzed accurately
and rapidly. In addition, pFCS provides information about the functional responses of
these cells to radiation (Krutzik et al. 2004).
The results presented here, provide important and clinically relevant insight into
how radiation affects the immune system at the level of signal transduction pathways, and
has near term translational potential.
22
CHAPTER 2
CHARACTEPvIZATION OF RADIATION-INDUCED IMMUNE SIGNALING
CHANGES IN ANTIGEN PRESENTING CELLS
Abstract
Radiation therapy is a widely used cancer treatment and pre-transplantation
conditioning regimen that has the potential to influence anti-tumor and post-
transplantation immune responses. Although conventional fractionated radiation doses
suppress certain types of immune responses by depleting lymphocyte subsets, we
proposed that we could identify radiation-induced signaling changes in antigen presenting
cells that enhance the function of specific subsets of antigen presenting immune cells.
Using phospho-flow cytometry analysis ofhuman monocytic cell line (U937), we
identified novel radiation-induced changes in the phosphorylation state ofNFkB family
members which are known in other cell types to play a vital role in the maintenance and
regulation of the immune function. We found that although these phosphorylation
changes were p53 independent, they were strongly dependent upon activation ofATM in
response to single or double-stranded breaks in DNA. We demonstrated that radiation
promotes the activation and functional maturation the antigen presenting cells, and that
radiation-induced phosphorylation ofNFkB Essential Modulator (NEMO) is necessary
for this functional effect. Furthermore, we found that NEMO is necessary for the
activation, maturation, and responsiveness ofhuman subsets ofhuman antigen presenting
23
cells, such as monocytes and conventional dendritic cells from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. In summary, we identified changes in the NFkB pathway that are
required for radiation-induced antigen presenting cell activation and function, and the
methods ofour analysis are especially well suited to the study of functional changes in
immune cell subsets. These findings provide insight into the mechanism ofaction of
radiation-enhanced promotion of the antigen presenting cell response, and these methods
are especially useful for monitoring immune changes that impact immune modulation in
transplantation and tumor vaccine studies.
24
Introduction
It is well known that irradiation of tumors can directly kill cancer cells as well as
tumor endothelial cells and other cells within the tumor stroma, resulting in vascular
damage, particularly to small vessels within tumors, which can have secondary effects on
tumor cell viability (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A
revived partnership 2005; Waiters 1999). Radiation can also have important effects on
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and antigen presenting cells within tumors (Demaria et al.
Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership 2005; Wärters 1999)
by promoting the recruitment and homing of antigen presenting and effector T cells to the
irradiated tumor site (Ganss et al. 2002; Nikitina and Gabrilovich 2001). For example,
tumor antigens released from tumor cells killed by radiation can serve as a source of
tumor antigens for dendritic cell (DC) uptake and presentation ofthese antigens to T cells
within the tumor microenvironment (Larsson, Fonteneau, and Bhardwaj 2001). Tumor
immunity has been induced by exogenously administrating dendritic cells intravenously,
subcutaneously, or intratumorally following local tumor radiation (Demaria and Formenti
2007; Kim et al. 2004; Nikitina and Gabrilovich 2001; Teitz-Tennenbaum et al. 2003).
In other studies, administration of Fms-like tyrosine receptor 3 ligand (Flt3-L) enhanced
DC mediated induction of anti-tumor T cell responses when used in combination with
tumor irradiation (Chakravarty et al. 1999; Teitz-Tennenbaum et al. 2003). Other studies
have demonstrated indirect activation ofDC by radiation via LPS released from the gut
following total body irradiation, with subsequent toll-like receptor activation, that
enhanced the effectiveness of adoptively transferred tumor-specifc CD8+ T cells, and
resulted in tumor regression (Paulos et al. 2007). More recently, local radiation therapy
25
has been strategically used as a component of a vaccine strategy in combination with
intratumoral CpG with some success (Brody et al. 2009).
Radiation can induce innate immune stimulatory signals (Matzinger 2002;
McBride et al. 2004), including the release ofpro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-a, IL-
lß, IL-2) (Hallahan et al. 1989; Hong et al. 1999; Ishihara et al. 1993; Rieser et al. 1997),
and upregulation ofco-stimulatory molecules, heat shock proteins, death receptors, and
major histocompatibility complex molecules (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and
immunotherapy: A revived partnership 2005; Friedman 2002; McBride et al. 2004; Teitz-
Tennenbaum et al. 2008). These "danger signals" can lead to maturation and activation
of antigen presenting cells (APC), which allow APC to process and present ingested
antigen to T cells (Gallucci and Matzinger 2001; McLellan, Brocker, and Kampgen 2000)
released by damaged and dead cells in irradiated tumors.
The molecular mechanisms of the radiation-mediated induction of these "danger
signals" have not been studied (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and
immunotherapy: A revived partnership 2005; McBride et al. 2004). Therefore, the goal
of the studies described here, was to elucidate or identify early radiation-induced
signaling changes in antigen presenting cells and elucidate the effects of these signaling
changes on APC receptor expression and function. For our initial experiments, we used
the U937 cell line (Sundstrom and Nilsson 1976) derived from a histocytic lymphoma,
that exhibits monocyte morphology and functions as an APC. The model was selected
because it provides a homogenous population ofcells, arrested in a pliant state of
maturation (Harris and Ralph 1985). Thereafter, we used fresh peripheral blood
26
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from normal individuals to confirm the results obtained with
the monocytic cell line and assess the influence of irradiation on human APC.
We focused on the NFkB pathway since it is activated after radiation in many
cell types, regulates cell death mechanisms, and has well-known regulatory roles in the
immune system (Hayden, West, and Ghosh 2006). This pathway is activated by radiation
in tumors and modulates the expression of various apoptotic and anti-apoptotic genes
(Verheij and Bartelink 2000). It is also a critical regulator in the development and
maintenance ofthe immune system, controls the survival ofT cells, B cells, and APC
(Magne et al. 2006), and regulates immune events, such as the cytokine transcription,
microbial phagocytosis, cell differentiation, and cell proliferation (Hayden, West, and
Ghosh 2006; Scheidereit 2006). In the classical or canonical pathway, NFkB complexes
are inactive in most cells and reside in the cytoplasm in a complex with inhibitory IkB
proteins (in particular ???a). When the pathway is activated, NFkB activation is
mediated by an IkB kinase complex (IKK). The IKK complex consists of two
catalytically active kinases (IKKa and ???ß) and a regulatory scaffold protein, NFkB
Essential Modulator (NEMO). Phopshorylation and activation ofNEMO is critical to
phosphorylation and activation of IKKa and ??ß, and activation of this complex leads
to phosphorylation of ???a, which is then degraded and releases NFkB, allowing it to be
phosphorylated and enter the nuclear to modulate target gene expression (Baldwin 1996;
Scheidereit 2006). We hypothesize that radiation-induced effects on early events in the
NFkB pathway, may activate or functionally modify certain immune cells, particularly
radioresistant APC. The experiments described here were designed to elucidate the
poorly understood role of the NFkB pathway in radiation-induced changes in APC,
27
which are relevant to better understanding the mechanism by which radiation can
enhance tumor immunity.
28
Materials and Methods
Cells and Culture
Human monocytic cells U937 (obtained from Laboratory ofDr. G. Nolan, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, originally from ATCC repository) were cultured in
RPMI- 1640 medium supplemented with 5% fetal calf serum, ImM glutamine,
penicillin/streptomycin in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C with
normal oxygen content or under hypoxic conditions (2% O2).
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) (buffy coats ofhealthy donors
obtained from the Stanford Blood Center, Palo Alto, California) were cultured (RPMI-
1640 medium supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% human serum, 2mM glutamine,
100U penicillin/ml, 100µg streptomycinml) in a humidified atmosphere containing 5%
CO2 at 37°C with normal oxygen content or under hypoxic (2% O2) conditions.
Irradiation
Cells were irradiated with ?-rays by a 137Cs source emitting at a fixed dose rate of 148
cGy/min or 531 cGy/min.
Monoclonal Antibodies and Chemical Reagents
Anti-HLA-DR-APC, Anti-CD3-FITC, Anti-CD4-PE, Anti-Lineage Negative Cocktail-
FITC, Anti-Alexa Fluor 700-CD1 lb, Anti-CDl lc-V450, Anti-CD 14-APC, Anti-CD80-
PE-Cy5, Anti-CD86-PE, Anti-IL-4-PE, Anti-FACS stain buffer, and Anti-Mouse
IgK/Negative Control (FBS) Compensation Particles Set were purchased from BD
Pharmingen (San Diego, CA). Anti ?-??? (NEMO) (S376)-FLTC, Anti-pNFkB p65
29
(S536)-Alexa Fluor 488, Anti ????a (Ser32) Rabbit mAb, and Anti-yH2AX-FITC were
purchased from Cell Signaling Technology Corp. (Danvers, CA). LIVE/DEAD fixable
dead cell stain kit in Aqua was purchased from Invitrogen, Inc. (Camarillo, CA).
Flow Cytometry Analysis
U937 cells were harvested and washed with PBS and stained for viable cell populations
using LIVE/DEAD Fixable Green Dead Cell Stain or Ethidium Monoazide
(???)(5µ§/t??; Invitrogen Camarillo, CA). U937 cells were stained for surface markers
and/or fixed with 1.5% paraformaldehyde and premeabilized with 4°C 100% methanol
while vortexing, washed with FACS stain buffer, and stained with appropriate antibodies
to detect intraceullar proteins. Thresholds for staining (surface and intracellular) were
determined using the isotype-matched mAbs. For flow cytometry on whole blood, whole
blood is stained for viable cell populations, surface markers to identify monocytes and
dendritic cells, lysed with BD Lysing solution (IX) and fixed and permeabilized before
staining with appropriate antibodies to detect intracellular proteins.
Monocyte/Macrophage Isolation
Human PBMC layer was isolated from buffy coats using Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient
centrifiigation. Buffy coats (8-10 mis) were diluted with phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS). Diluted blood was layered onto Ficoll-Hypaque and centrifuged at 2,000 ? rpm.
Mononuclear layer was removed and washed three times with PBS at 1200 ? rpm and
viability was assessed with Trypan Blue or whole blood was washed with PBS and then
cells were either negatively selected with Untouched Human CD4 T cell Dynabeads,
30
Flow Comp CD 14 Dynabeads, or Human DC Enrichment Dynabeads (Invitrogen,
Camarillo, CA). Following each selection, the cells were counted, and viability, and
purity were assesed by flow cytometry. Cells were aliquoted for treatment with 0 or 2Gy,
and incubated for various times. The cells were stained with LIVE/DEAD fixable green
dead cell stain kit (1:1000 in PBS) prior to final surface marker staining and analysis to
exclude dead cells. For phospho-flow cytometry (intracellular staining), cells were first
incubated with LIVE/DEAD aqua stain, washed with PBS, and stained with the
appropriate anti-surface receptor mAbs in FACS stain buffer. Cells were fixed with 1 .5%
paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 4°C 100% methanol, washed with FACS stain
buffer, and incubated with intracellular antibodies at room temperature for 30 minutes.
This intracellular staining method varied for human intracellular cytokine staining (kit by
BD Biosciences). Cells were activated with leukocyte activation cocktail (10µ1/1-2 xlO6
cells/ml) and monensin (4µ1/6p??5 culture) and incubated for 4 hours at 37°C, 5% CO2
before staining for cytokines. Thresholds for staining (surface and intracellular) were
determined using the isotype-matched control mAbs. All analyses were performed using
the LSRII in the Shared FACS Facility (Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine at
Stanford University). Resultant data was analyzed using FlowJo software (TreeStar,
Ashland, OR).
Wildtype p53 Transfection
pCMV-Neo-Bam p53 wt and pCMV-Neo-Bam empty control plasmids were purchased
from Addgene Co. (Cambridge, MA). Plasmid DNA was purified by isopropanol
precipitation by centrifugation using Plasmid Midi Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). U937
31
cells were fed with fresh medium one day prior to transfection. The next day, cells were
collected and suspended in Electroporation Medium (10 µ? BioBrene Plus per 100 ml and
0.2% (w/v) Glucose in PBS). The DNA was suspended in 0.3 ml ofElectroporation
Medium at room temperature and mixed with 0.5 ml ofthe cell suspension (final volume
was 0.8 ml) in an electroporation cuvette. The mixture was electroporated at 960
microfarads, 300 V, left in the cuvettes at room temperature for 5 min, and then
transferred to 1 ml ofmedium in a 15 ml tube and incubated for 5 to 10 min at room
temperature. Cells were resuspended in 4 ml of medium, and added to 10 ml ofculture
medium + G418 in a T-75 flask (15 ml total volume). To maintain a stable transfection
culture, medium and G418 were replaced every two days. Cells were assayed for
expression two days after transfection.
Cytoplasmic Extract Preparation and Western Blot Analysis
Cells were lysed in cell extraction buffer purchased from Invitrogen. (Camarillo, CA),
supplemented with ImM PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail, and phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Nuclei were separated by centrifugation and
sonicated cytoplasmic extracts were obtained. The protein concentration in each sample
was determined using the method ofBradford Protein Assay. Samples, each containing
20 µg of cell Iysate in loading buffer, were electrophoresed in 12% Polyacrylamide gels
and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. Then immunoblotting was
performed with various antibodies (Phospho-p53 (Serl5), phospho-ATM (S1981), ATM,
Phospho-???-? (Ser376), ???-?, DNA-PK, ATR, and actin) from Cell Signaling
Technology Corp. (Danvers, MA). After washing the blots with TBS (lX)-Tween (1%),
blots were incubated with anti-mouse IgG, or anti-rabbit IgG HRP-linked antibody.
32
Immunoreactivity of the blots was detected by ECL Western Blot Detection Reagent
(Amersham Biosciences, Pittsburg, PA).
Assay for quantitative determination of GSH and GSSG levels
Intracellular GSH (reduced glutathione) and GSSG (glutathione disulfide) levels were
measured using the GSH reductase recycling assay as previously described (Rahman,
Kode, and Biswas 2006). Concentrations of GSH and GSSG were expressed as nmol/mg
ofprotein and the ratios ofGSSG/(GSH+GSSG) were calculated. GSH levels of cells
were also measured by flow cytometery with Thiol Tracker Violet (Glutathione Detection
Reagent) from Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA) following incubating the cells with the dye for
30 min at 370C.
Transient siRNA Transfection of U937 Cells
These experiments used HP Validated (by quantitative RT-PCR) ATM siRNA from
Qiagen (Valencia, CA), AllStars Negative (nonsilencing) Control siRNA (5nmol),
HiPerfect transfection reagent and RNAse free water, and were performed in an RNAse-
free environment with 20µ? siRNA solutions. The day before the transfection, cells
were seeded at 8 ? IO4 cells per well in a 24 well plate with complete RPMI- 1640
medium and allowed to incubate under normal growth conditions. On the day of
transfection, siRNA at a final concentration of 5nM HiPerFect Transfection Reagent was
added to siRNA and vortexed. The siRNA samples were incubated at room temperature
for 5-10 minutes and added drop-wise to the cells while swirling. Cells were incubated
under normal growth medium and allowed to incubate for 48 hours before use.
33
Culture for Mixed Lymphocyte Reaction
CD4+ T cells from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were purified
using indirect magnetic labeling for negative isolation ofCD4 T cells with CD4+ T cell
isolation kits (Miltenyi Biotech, Auburn, CA). 100,000 CD4+ T cells from a healthy
donor were combined and incubated 1:10 (APC:T) with unirradiated or irradiated (2 or
20 Gy) U937 cells for up to 6 days in a humidified 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator. U937 cells
were irradiated and allowed to incubate for 48 hours before combining with CD4+ T
cells.
Similar experiments were set-up with CD4+ T cells isolated from PBMC or whole blood
using purified CD4 T cell Dynabeads (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA) in which 500,000
CD4+ T cells were combined 1:5 (APC:T) with unirradiated or irradiated (2 Gy) CD14+
cells purified using CD 14 Dynabeads (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA) or purified Lineage -
DC (CD3CD14CD16CD19CD20CD56) isolated from PBMC or whole blood by
negative isolation using Human DC Enirchment Kit (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA).
Cultures were incubated for up to 6 days in a humidified 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator.
Monocytes and DC were irradiated and allowed to incubate for 12 hours before
combining with CD4+ T cells. In addition, CD4+ T cells isolated from whole blood were
combined with CD4+ T cell depleted unirradiated and irradiated whole blood.Both U937
and human APC subset MLR experiments were set-up in 96 well plates to assess cell
proliferation, cytokine production, and/or co-stimulatory molecule upregulation. Co-
stimulatory molecule (CD80 and CD86) upregulation was assessed in APC subset MLRs
only.
34
Cell Proliferation ELISA BrdU Assay
BrdU incorporation was measured using a kit supplied by Roche Applied Science
(Indianapolis, IN). In this assay, 100,000 CD4+T cells were seeded with U937 cells at a
1:10 (APC:T) ratio and 500,000 CD4+ T cells were seeded with monocytes or dendritic
cells at 1:5 (APC:T) ratios in 96-well culture dishes from human PBMC and from whole
blood. The assay was prepared by incubating the cells for 24 hrs at 37°C with 10 µ? of
working BrdU stock in each well, followed by air drying at 60°C for Ihr, after which
time 100 µ? FixDenat solution was added for 30 min at room temperature. The FixDenat
solution was removed and 100 µ? Anti-BrdU-POD working solution was allowed to
incubate at 37°C for 60 min. Plates were washed with PBS 3 times for 15 min each at
room temperature. Finally, 100 µ? ofTMB substrate solution was incubated with the
cells for 15 min at room temperature and 25 µ? stop solution (H2SO4) was added before
reading the plate. Absorbance was measured spectrophometrically between 450 and
595nm after 4 days incubation for cultures ofboth U937 cells and monocytes and DC.
Background (no BrdU label) was subtracted from measured absorbances. The mean
absorbance±S.E.M. was calculated.
ELISA Cytokine Supernatant Assay
Single Analyte ELISArray Kits (SA Biosciences, Frederick, MD) for IL-4, TNF-a and
IFN-? were used to analyze cytokine production from MLRs per manufacturer's
instructions using the standard sandwich technique. Cells were removed by
centrifiigation for 10 minutes at lOOOxg. Supernatants were aliquoted and stored at < -
20 0C until further use.
35
Co-stimulatory Molecules Assay
CD4+T cells were combined 1:5 (APC:T) with unirradiated and irradiated (2 Gy)
monocytes and allowed to incubate for 12and 48 hours at 37°C, 5% CO2, as above.
Monocytes were combined immediately with CD4+ T cells after being irradiated. Cells
from the MLR were removed at the timepoints described above and stained for CD80 and
CD86 expression. The same experimental design was used for CD4+T cells:DC MLR
experiments.
Reagents
The following reagents were used in experiments as follows: 100% Methanol (Stanford
Biosciences) and 16% Paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hartfield, PA)
used at 1.5% for intracellular staining Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare Amersham
Biosciences ,Piscataway, NJ); N-acetyl-L-cysteine, and L-Buthionine-sulfoximine, were
purchased in solid form from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO); ???? NEMO Binding
Domain (NBD) Inhibitory Peptide Set including ???????? Binding Domain (NBD)
Inhibitor Peptide: 2 ? 1 mg (lyophilized) (Imgenex,San Diego, CA); and ATM inhibitor,
Mofholin-4yl-6-thianthren-l-yl-pyran-4-one (Ku55933) (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA).
Statistical Analysis Tool
To accurately compare changes in phosphorylation profiles ofthe NFkB pathway after
radiation, the median fluorescence intensity (MFI) was calculated using FlowJo software
from Treestar Corp (Ashland, OR). Two-tailed Student's t-test (were used to calculate p-
36
values (Predictive Analytics Software (PASW)) and GraphPad Sofware, San Diego,
CA). Standard error of the mean (S.E.M) was calculated using GraphPad Sofware, San
Diego, CA. For all tests, ? value of0.05 or less was considered significant.
37
Results
Radiation (XRT) induces phosphorylation of NFkB members
To determine how XRT affects immunologically important signaling proteins in
the U937 line, cells were irradiated with 2 or 20 Gy and allowed to incubate for various
timepoints. Phosph-specific antibodies were used to identify XRT induced-changes in
NFkB pathway family members. XRT induced phosphorylation ofNFkB (Figure IA)
and NFkB essential modulator (NEMO) (Figure IB) in a dose-dependent manner, with
the greatest activation of both at 4hr after 20 Gy, which subsequently declined over 16
hrs to near baseline levels. Representative histograms ofphosphorylation ofNEMO and
NFkB in U937 cells after 2 and 20 Gy at 4hr and 16hrs are shown in Supplementary
Figure 1.
Since XRT leads to DNA damage from single and double stranded breaks we
hypothesized that XRT-induced NFkB changes were due to DNA damage. In order to
test this hypothesis, experiments were performed to determine ifDNA-damaging agents
resulted in NFkB pathway phosphorylation profiles similar to those obtained with XRT.
For these experiments, Doxorubicin at two different doses, 0.1 µg/ml and 0.25 µg/ml,
was used because it is known to cause DNA damage (which is sensed by ATM,) and to
activate NFkB (Alderton 2007). In the U937 cells, Doxorubicin at 0.1 µg/ml does not
induce phosphorylation ofNFkB or NEMO (data not shown). However, at 0.25 µg/ml,
Doxorubicin induced phosphorylation ofNFkB and NEMO after 3hr in a dose-dependent
manner. Initial phosphorylation ofNFkB and NEMO was seen at 1 hour, with the
38
greatest activation ofboth occurring at 4 hours, which then declined and reached a
plateau by 16 hours (Figure IC and ID).
ROS levels contribute to XRT-induced NEMO phosphorylation
XRT not only leads to direct DNA damage (including double stranded breaks),
but also produces ROS which has been shown to indirectly cause DNA damage and can
also directly activate the NFkB pathway in certain systems (Ho, Chen, and Bray 1999;
Nordberg and Arner 2001; Siebenlist, Franzoso, and Brown 1994; Verhasselt et al. 1999).
Next we studied the effect of radiation on the redox status of the cell, as measured by the
ratio of GSH (reduced):GSSG (disulfide), and demonstrated the importance of ROS in
producing XRT-induced NFkB changes.
The GSSG:total GSH (GSH,) ratio in U937 cells was the highest Ihr after
irradiation with 20 Gy, compared to cells irradiated with 2 or 0 Gy, and declined over
time in a dose-dependent manner to near baseline at 16 hrs(Figure 2A). We examined
the effect of radiation on the redox status of the cell by enhancing ROS production by
treating cells with either L-Buthionine sulphoximine (BSO; which irreversibly inhibits y-
glutamylcysteine synthase, leading to depletion of GSH) or N-acetyl cysteine (NAC; a
potent antioxidant that increases the levels of GSH and indirectly reduces ROS). In the
absence of radiation, increasing oxidative stress (with BSO) or reducing oxidative stress
(with NAC) had no direct effect on NEMO or NFkB phopshorylation. However, when
the effects of BSO or NAC on radiation-induced changes were examined, we found that
cells treated with BSO for 3 hrs had significantly lower levels ofGSH at 1 (p=0.0392) to
39
16 hrs (p=0.0037) compared to untreated cells (Supplemental Figure 2A). In contrast,
treatment with NAC for 3 hrs significantly increased GSH levels at 1 (p=0.01548) to 16
hrs (p=0.0039) compared to untreated cells (Supplemental Figure 2B). When U937
mutant cells were pre-treated with 1.95uM BSO, irradiated at O, 2, or 20 Gy, and allowed
to incubate for 1, 4, 8, or 16 hrs, there was no additional activation of pNEMO above
baseline as compared to XRT alone, and no significant difference between median
fluorescence intensity (MFI) values for cells treated with XRT alone compared to cells
treated with BSO+XRT (data not shown). With 3.95 µ? BSO, there was a statistically
significant increase in activation at Ihr after 2 (p=0.0280) and 20 Gy (p=0.0452) when
compared to the 0 Gy control, that did not occur at 4, 8, or 16 hrs after 2 or 20 Gy (Figure
2B). Representative histograms of3.95µ? BSO+ XRT versus XRT alone changes in
pNEMO are shown in Supplementary Figure 2C.
In similar experiments, ImM NAC did not inhibit XRT-induced activation of
pNEMO in U937 mutant cells. There was no significant difference between MFI values
for cells treated with XRT alone or NAC+XRT (data not shown). In contrast, when
1OmM NAC was used, there was a statistically significant partial inhibition ofactivation
ofpNEMO by XRT at 1 and 4 hrs (p=0.0416), with the greatest inhibition occurring at
Ihr after 20 Gy (p=0.041 1), that declined over time (Figure 2C). Representative
histograms of 1OmM NAC+ XRT changes versus XRT alone in pNEMO are shown in
Supplementary Figure 2D. These results suggest that ROS may have a modest
contribution to XRT induced phosphorylation ofNEMO, but that other factors must play
a more important role in producing the XRT induced changes described above.
40
XRT induced phosphorylation of NEMO requires ATM
Since XRT leads to DNA damage from double stranded breaks, we hypothesized
that XRT-induced NFkB changes were due to DNA damage. In order to test this
hypothesis, we used an inhibitor ofATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated) kinase,
Ku55933, that selectively inhibits ATM-dependent cellular phosphorylation following
XRT (IC50=13nM), and does not inhibit DNA-Protein Kinase (DNA-PK; ?!50=16.6µ?
) or ATM and rad3 related Protein Kinase (ATR; IC50 > ???µ?). Kinetics for CHK2,
the downstream target of ATM, CHKl, downstream target ofATR, and DNA-PK were
analyzed via phospho-fiow cytometry and confirm this specificity (Supplementary Figure
3). In these experiments, U937 cells were treated with ??µ? Ku55933 for 60 minutes
before irradiation with 0, 2, or 20 Gy. Ku55933 significantly inhibited (p=<0.05) XRT-
mediated induction ofpNEMO in U937 mutant cells at 1, 4, 8, and 16 hrs after 2 Gy and
20 Gy. Though significant, inhibition was less at 24 hrs (Figure 3A). Since the greatest
activation of phospho (p) NEMO was seen at 4hr after 20 Gy, we used this dose to
confirm these results by western blot. We found that NEMO and ATM were not
phosphorylated in untreated U937 cells. Although radiation alone phosphorylated both
ATM and NEMO, pre-treatment with Ku55933 significantly inhibited this
phosphorylation. The requirement ofATM for phosphorylation ofNEMO was
confirmed using an ATM deficient cell line (G0536). Radiation alone phosphorylated
NEMO but not ATM, and pre-treatment with Ku55933 again significantly inhibited
phosphorylation ofNEMO. The amount oftotal NEMO, DNA-PK, and ATR, were
consistent in all three treatment groups (Figure 3B).
41
To further demonstrate that DNA-damage is the main mechanism of action
responsible for the observed XRT-induced changes, U937 cells were treated with/without
siRNA for ATM or negative control siRNA. In ATM knocked down cells, NEMO and
ATM were not phosphorylated after 20 Gy. Similar amounts of total NEMO protein and
ATM were observed in all groups with the exception of ATM knocked-down cells that
did not express ATM. ATM siRNA did not affect expression of other ?G?? family
kinases DNA-PKcs and ATR (Figure 3C).
In order to determine whether other DNA-damaging treatments (i.e.
chemotherapeutic cytotoxic agents such as doxorubicin) also depend on ATM activation
for phosphorylation ofNEMO, cells treated with U937 cells were also treated with ??µ?
Ku55933 for 60 minutes before incubation with 0.25 µg/ml Doxorubicin for 3 hours in
order to determine ifNEMO activation would be inhibited, and produce similar
phopshorylation profiles to those seen with Ku55933 inhibition ofNEMO after XRT.
Ku55933 significantly inhibited (p=<0.05) doxorubicin-mediated induction ofpNEMO in
U937 mutant cells at 1, 4, 8, and 16 and 24 hrs after doxorubicin treatment (Figure 3D).
??2?? and NEMO phosphorylation patterns correlate after XRT
To further study the relationships between induction of DNA damage by radiation
and phosphorylation ofNEMO, flow cytometry was used to detect phosphorylated H2AX
(the fluorescent intensity correlates to the amount ofDNA damage present), since
phosphorylation of histone H2AX (??2??) occurs rapidly in response to the presence of
DNA double-strand breaks (Olive and Banath 2004). U937 cells were treated with 0, 2,
42
and 20 Gy and allowed to incubate at 1, 4, 8, and 16 hrs prior to measuring ??2??
phosphorylation. Cells stained with phospho (p) NEMO were run in parallel. Results
demonstrated that ??2?? was phosphorylated after XRT in a dose-dependent manner.
An initial increase in phosphorylation was seen at Ihr after 2 and 20 Gy, which
increased further at 4hrs after 2 Gy and was highest at 4hr after 20 Gy. After
phosphorylation peaked at 4hrs, it declined at 8hrs and further decreased at 16hrs to near
baseline levels seen at 0 Gy. This phosphorylation pattern was highly correlated
(correlation coefficient= 0.95955) to the kinetics ofNEMO in U937 cells after XRT. The
correlation of kinetics for ??2?? and NEMO phosphorylation suggested that XRT-
induced changes in the NFkB pathway are due to DNA damage (Supplementary Figures
4A). The magnitude of increase in ??2AX and NEMO is similar at the different time
points, but was higher for ??2?? is higher at Ihr than NEMO, suggesting that activation
ofyH2AX is occurring earlier (Supplementary Figure 4B).
DNA-damage can lead to activation of receptors and intracellular signaling
pathways that in turn stimulate p53 activity along with cell cycle checkpoints and DNA
repair mechanisms. Since U937 cells possesses a mutant, functionally inactive p53 gene,
we transfected U937 cells with wildtype p53 to determine the role ofp53 in the acute-
XRT induced changes observed in U937 cells. Western blot analysis confirmed that the
p53 transfected gene was functionally activated, because p21, a protein directly
downstream ofp53, was upregulated in a dose-dependent manner after treatment with
varying doses ofDoxorubicin (0.5, 1, and 2 µg/ml), which is a known p53 inducer. No
upregulation ofp21 occurred in empty vector control cells (Supplementary Figure 5A).
43
We found that XRT-induced phosphorylation ofNEMO and NFkB was not
changed by the presence of p53 (Supplementary Figure 5B and 5C). Representative
histograms of thephosphorylation ofNEMO and NFkB in U937 and p53+ U937 cells
after 2 and 20 Gy at 4hr and 16hr are shown in Supplementary Figure 5D and 5E.
Importantly, phosphorylation profiles for NEMO and NFkB in mutant p53 and p53+ cells
were not altered by vector alone (Supplementary Figure 5F and 5G). The presence of
p53 also did not alter activation ofNEMO and NFkB because Doxorubicin induced
phosphorylation changes in NEMO and NFkB in U937 cells at 1, 4, 8, and 16 hrs that
were striking similar to those seen in p53 mutant U937 cells (Supplementary Figure 6A
and 6B). Furthermore, changes in redox status of the cell after radiation as detected by
GSSG: GSH1 ratio, BSO+XRT and NAC+XRT were not p53 dependent (data not
shown).
NFkB pathway is necessary for maturation of U937 cells by XRT
We next studied the effect ofXRT on the levels of expression ofAPC activation
and maturation markers, including MHC and co-stimulatory molecules- CD40 and CD86,
MHC Class II (HLA-DR), but not CD80, were upregulated in a dose-dependent fashion
at 48 hrs. Since U937 cells do not express a basal level ofCD80, it was not surprising
that this costimulatory molecule was not upregulated after XRT (Figure 4A).
Representative histograms ofCD40, CD80, CD86, HLA-DR expression, and PMA
(positive control) are shown in Supplementary Figure 8A.
44
In order to determine if the NFkB pathway is responsible for the maturation of
U937 cells, a ??? (NEMO) Binding Domain Inhibitory Peptide (NBD) was utilized.
NBD inhibits formation of the complex between NEMO and ???a/???ß and thereby
prevents phosphorylation of ???a , and subsequent phosphorylation ofNFkB (Strickland
and Ghosh 2006). These effects were not p53 dependent (data not shown). When cells
were either mock-treated with XRT, treated with XRT alone, or pre-treated with the
control or NBD peptide for 12 hrs prior to XRT, NBD peptide significantly inhibited
upregulation ofCD40, CD86, and MHC Class II when compared to XRT +control
peptide and XRT alone (Figure 4A). NBD treatment with 2 and 20 Gy prevented
upregulation ofCD40 when compared to 2 or 20 Gy+control peptide (p-values=0.0457
and 0.0040) and 2 or 20 Gy alone (p-values=0.0085 and 0.0003) (Figure 4A). Similarily,
inhibition ofCD86 upregulation by 2 or 20 Gy+NBD peptide was statistically significant
when compared to 2 or 20 Gy+control peptide (p-values=0.0003 and 0.0001) and 2 or 20
Gy alone (p-values=0.0012 and 0.0005) (Figure 4A). MHC Class II upregulation was
significantly inhibited by 2 or 20 Gy+NBD peptide when compared to 2 or 20
Gy+control peptide (p-values=0.0084 and 0.0001) and 2 or 20 Gy alone (p-
values=0.0077 and 0.0001) (Figure 4A). These changes were not p53 dependent (data
not shown). No changes were seen in CD80 expression with XRT alone, XRT+control
peptide, or XRT+NBD peptide. Control peptide values were very similar to XRT alone
(data not shown).
In addition, to confirm that the NBD peptide inhibits activation ofthe NFkB
pathway, cells were irradiated with 20 Gy at 0 and 48 hrs. XRT induced phosphorylation
of ???a at 48hrs, when compared to mock-treated (0 Gy) controls at the same timepoints.
45
When cells were treated with the non-specific control peptide+XRT, MFI values were the
same as those from cells treated with XRT alone. In irradiated cells pre-treated with the
NBD peptide, phosphorylation of ???a was inhibited at 48hrs when compared to levels
in irradiated cells pre-treated with the control peptide (Supplementary Figure 7B).
NBD Peptide Decreases U937 Cell Responsiveness
It was vital to determine whether the observed changes in the NFkB pathway after
XRT had any measurable effect on U937 function. Allogeneic MLR was chosen for this
purpose because it is a fundamental technique used to assess human lymphocyte
biological responses to various stimuli like APC (Muul et al. 2008). Human U937 cells
can be induced to undergo terminal monocytic differentiation in mixed lymphocyte
cultures and to express higher levels ofCD 14 and CDl lb (Koren, Anderson, and Larrick
1979). Experiments were then performed to study the potential effect ofchanges in
specific cellular activities and activation ofthe NFkB pathway after XRT on U937
cellular responsiveness/function. Cells were either treated with 0, 2, or 20 Gy XRT with
or without pre-incubation with the control or NBD peptide for 12 hrs. Following
irradiation, cells were incubated for 48 hrs cells before adding purified CD4+ T cells
(isolated from PBMC from healthy donors), in a 1 (APC): 10(T) ratio for 4 days. T cell
proliferation was measured spectrophotometrically to quantitate the incorporation of
BrdU into the cell populations. As shown in Figure 8, control groups consisted of
responder cells alone (purified CD4+ T cells), stimulator cells alone (irradiated U937
cells), and CD4+T cells combined with unirradiated U937 cells in each treatment group.
46
CD4+ T cells combined with irradiated U937 cells or U937 cells pre-incubated with non-
specific control peptide, resulted in dose-dependent T cell proliferation when compared
to CD4+ T cells incubated with unirradiated U937 cells. However, when cells were
treated with the NBD peptide, T cell proliferation decreased 2 fold and 2.39 fold at 2
(p=0.01 29) and 20 Gy (p=0.0016), respectively, when compared to XRT alone. T cell
proliferation was decreased 1.97 fold and 2.32 fold at 2 (p=0.0323) and 20 Gy
(p=0.0132), respectively, when compared to cells in control peptide treatment group
(Figure 4B).
XRT activates and enhances U937 cell response: Cytokine production increases in
T cells after XRT
Pro-inflammatory cytokine production is another indicator ofAPC activation and
cytokine production. U937 cells were either treated with 0, 2, or 20 Gy XRT with or
without pre-incubation with the control or NBD peptide for 12 hrs. Following
irradiation, cells were incubated for 48 hours before adding purified CD4+ T cells
(isolated from PBMC from healthy donors), in a 1 (APC): 10(T) ratio and were allowed to
incubate for up to 6 days. Cells were removed from MLR on days 1, 2, 4, and 6 and
supernatants were collected for assays of IL-4, TNF-a, and IFN-? cytokine production via
ELISA. TNF-a, and IFN-? cytokine production (pg/ml), increased after 1 day and peaked
after incubation for 2 days, with TNF-a and IFN-? at about 700 pg/ml and 1000 pg/ml,
respectively. Cytokine production then declined by day 6 to approximately 400 pg/ml
and 200 pg/ml for TNF-a and IFN-?, respectively in unirradiated cultures. This same
47
phenomenon was also seen in cells irradiated with 2 Gy with enhanced cytokine
production after irradiation. TNF-a concentrations increased from approximately from
690 to 950 pg/ml (p=<0.0001) and IFN-? concentration increased from approximately
1000 to 1500 pg/ml (p=<0.0001) after 2 days incubation (Figure 5A). Similarly, in
unirradiated cells, IL-4 production increased after 1 day and peaked at 2 days (at about 35
pg/ml) with subsequent decline by day 6 (to approximately 13 pg/ml). The magnitude of
enhanced IL-4 production was significantly less than that ofTNF-a and IFN-?, and
actually declined after 2 Gy (Figure 5B). IL-4 production at 2 days was 18 pg/ml after 2
Gy versus 35 pg/ml in unirradiated control cultures (p=0.0031). Production of cytokines
TNF-a, IFN-?, and IL-4 in unirradiated cells is consistent with activation and function of
U937 cells in the MLR. Increased levels of TNF-a and IFN-? in cultures of irradiated
cells further indicates that radiation enhanced U937 responsiveness. In other experiments,
U937 cells were pre-treated with the control peptide (non-specific to NEMO) prior to
irradiation and coculture with CD4+ T cells. There was no difference in TNF-a, IFN-?,
or IL-4 concentrations at 1, 2, 4, or 6 hrs in supernatants from cultures irradiated as
compared to unirradiated cells (Figure 5C and 5D). Supernatants from similar
experiments using a NBD inhibitory peptide demonstrated significant inhibition ofTNF-
a and IFN-? levels by the peptide (Figure 5E). The kinetics ofcytokine induction were
similar, but in cultures pretreated with the inhibitor, the day 2 TNF-a cytokine
concentration was 3 1 pg/ml and IFN-? was 32 pg/ml, which is more than 30 fold less than
observed in control cultures. TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine production also increased after 2
Gy, in cultures pretreated with the NBD inhibitor, with peaks levels of48 and 52 pg/ml at
2 days, respectively. However, again these levels were 30 fold less than in cultures of
48
irradiated cells without the inhibitor. The difference between TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine
production at 0 and 2 Gy was still significant (p<0.002) (Figure 5E). Pretreatment with
the NBD peptide largely obviated this difference in IL-4 cytokine production, with levels
of 35 and 20 pg/ml after 0 and 2 Gy, respectively, although the decrease in IL-4 after
radiation was still significant (p=0.0021) (Figure 5F). These results suggest that
activation ofNFkB is important for U937 cell function/responsiveness and increased
responsiveness after radiation, and that IL-4 production is independent ofNFkB
activation by radiation.
Next, intracellular cytokine production was examined in order to determine the
cellular source ofcytokine production. At 48 hours, pooled unirradiated and irradiated (2
Gy) U937 and CD4+ T cells from MLR cultures were activated with Leukocyte
Activation Cocktail and Monensin (BD Biosciences) for 4 hours before surface marker
and intracellular cytokine staining. Cells were stained with CD3, CD4, CD14, CDl lb,
and cytokine markers. The results demonstrated that IL-4, IFN-?, and TNF-a were
produced by CD4+ T cells. The percentage of cytokine positive CD4+ T cells is shown
in two-dimensional plots ofcytokine versus CD4 (Supplementary Figure 8A) and in bar-
graph representation (Supplementary Figure 8B).
XRT enhances APC function which is dependent upon activation of NEMO
Since the experiments described above demonstrated that XRT induces
functionally significant effects in a monocytic cell line via NEMO and NFkB
phosphorylation, experiments were next performed to determine the importance of the
49
NFkB pathway in APC responsiveness and the role of the NFkB pathway in APC
function/responsiveness after radiation. To do so, APC subsets, monocytes and dendritic
cells, were used for a variety of functional experiments. First, the effect of radiation on
the function of monocytes, was studied by combining either unirradiated or irradiated
monocytes (2 Gy) (CDH+) with CD4+ T cells in a 1:5 (T:APC) ratio. Cells were
removed and stained for subset surface markers as well as CD80 and CD86 at 12 and 48
hours. Figure 6A shows representative examples of two-color flow cytometric analyses
ofCD80 and CD86 expression from gated CDH+CDl Ib+ cells before and after
irradiation at these time points. At 12 hours after irradiation, CD86+ monocytes increased
from 2.86% to 6.21% and after 48 hours, increased from 2.02% to 5.11% (Figure 6A). In
contrast, there was a substantial increase in CD80 expression at 12 hours from 0.43% to
30.4%, but only a very small increase at later time points (Figure 6A). This can be
explained by the large increase (93.1%) in CD86+ CD80+ monocytes at 48 hours,
although at 12 hours CD86/CD80 expression had increased from 0.32% to 56.4% (Figure
6A). Similar results were obtained with monocytes pre-treated with the control peptide
before irradiation (data not shown). Not only did radiation enhance expression of co-
stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 or monocytes, but inhibition ofNEMO by the
NBD peptide, which inhibits IkBa activation (Supplementary Figure 9A), inhibited this
increased expression.
Experiments were then performed using the same experimental design as above
with monocytes treated with the NBD peptide for 12 hours before irradiation and
cocultured with CD4+ T cells. Figure 6B shows representative examples of two-color
flow cytometric analyses of CD80 and CD86 expression from gated CDH+CDl Ib+ cells
50
before and after treatment with NBD peptide+XRT at 12 and 48 hours. With the
inhibitor, there was only a negligible difference in CD86 expression between any of the
groups, and a small increase in expression ofCD80 from 0.61% to 6.61% at 12 hours and
0.21% to 1 1.3% at 48 hours (Figure 6B). The greater increase in CD80 expression at 48
hours in NBD treated cells compared with those treated with XRT alone can be explained
by the presence of fewer double positive CD80/86 cells. NEMO inhibition significantly
suppressed radiation-induced CD80/86 expression (<3.6%) at all timepoints (p=<0.0001).
The mean CD80/86 expression percentages from unirradiated and irradiated monocytes at
12 and 48 hours are shown in Figure (Supplementary Figure 9B). These results suggest
that activation of the NFkB pathway is vital to enhanced monocyte response/function
after radiation.
NBD peptide decreases Monocyte and Dendritic Cell responsiveness
Next we wanted to study the effects of radiation-induced activation ofthe NFkB
pathway on APC function. MLR cultures were set up as before and T cell proliferation
was measured by incorporation ofBrdU into the cells and readout as absorbance. As
shown in Figure 6C, control groups consisted of responder cells alone (purified CD4+ T
cells), stimulator cells alone (irradiated monocytes), and CD4+T cells combined with
unirradiated monocytes in each treatment group. CD4+ T cells combined with irradiated
monocytes or monocytes (1:5) pre-incubated with non-specific control peptide, resulted
in increased T cell proliferation, from 0.1084 to 0.6204 with XRT alone and from 0.1 10
to 0.609 with control peptide+XRT when compared to CD4+ T cells incubated with
51
unirradiated monocytes. However, when monocytes were treated with the NBD peptide,
T cell proliferation decreased by about 4 fold (p=0.0003) when compared to XRT alone,
and T cell proliferation was decreased by about 4 fold (p=<0.0001) when compared to
cells in control peptide treatment group. These results show thatradiation enhances
monocyte function, which seems to be dependent upon NEMO activation or NFkB
pathway function.
Similar results were seen with dendritic cells (Figure 6D). T cell proliferation
increased from 0.141 to 0.726 with XRT alone and from 0.141 to 0.716 with control
peptide+XRT when compared to CD4+ T cells incubated with unirradiated dendritic
cells. However, in cultures with monocytes pretreated with the NBD peptide, T cell
proliferation decreased by about 5 fold (p=<0.0001) when compared to XRT alone, and T
cell proliferation was decreased by about 5 fold (p=<0.0001) when compared to cells in
control peptide treatment group. Therefore radiation enhanced dendritic cell function,
which was dependent upon NEMO activation or NFkB pathway function.
In addition, we confirmed these resuts in whole blood samples. When examining
APC responsiveness in whole blood via MLR cultures to readout T cell proliferation,
similar results were seen to those with human PBMC. Monocytes (Figure 7A) and
dendritic cells (Figure 7?) isolated from whole blood were combined with CD4+ T cells
isolated from whole blood. T cell proliferation increased from 0.105 to 0.478 and from
0.1 13 to 0.586 in MLR with monocytes and dendritic cells, respectively. No difference
was seen in T cell proliferation when APC were pre-incubated with control peptide
before XRT in MLR cultures. However, in cultures were monocytes and dendritic cells
52
were pretreated with the NBD peptide, T cell proliferation decreased by about 3.5 fold
(p=0.0002) and 5 fold (p=<0.0001), respectively compared to XRT and control
peptide+XRT.
XRT activates and enhances Monocyte and Dendritic Cell response in a NEMO
dependent manner
Pro-inflammatory cytokine production was measured from MLR cultures of
unirradiated or irradiated (2 or 20 Gy) monocytes (CDH+). Cells were removed from
MLR cultures on days 1, 2, 4, and 6 and supernatants were collected for measurement of
IL-4, TNF-a, and IFN-? cytokine concentration peaked at 900 pg/ml and 880 pg/ml,
respectively, on day 2, and declined by day 6 to approximately 330 pg/ml and 175 pg/ml
for TNF-a and IFN-?, respectively in unirradiated cultures. This same phenomenon was
seen after 2 Gy, although the magnitude of cytokine induction was greater after
irradiation. TNF-a increased from approximately from 900 to 1000 pg/ml (p=0.0006)
and IFN-? increased from approximately 880 to 1300 pg/ml (p=<0.0001) after 2 days
(Figure 8A). In unirradiated control cultures, IL-4 production increased after 1 day and
peaked at 2 days at 30 pg/ml. In contrast, IL-4 levels decreased following 2 Gy (20
pg/ml after 2 Gy versus 30 pg/ml after 0 Gy at day 2 (p=0.024) (Figure 8A). The
induction of these cytokines in the MLR demonstrates monocyte activation and
functioning. Elevated levels ofTNF-a and IFN-? after 2 Gy indicates that radiation
enhanced monocyte responsiveness increased. IL-4 cytokine production after radiation
suggests that IL-4 may play an anti-inflammatory role. Results from control peptide
53
(non-specific to NEMO) treated monocytes were not significantly different from those
treated with radiation alone (Figure 8B).
Pre-treatment with the NBD inhibitory peptide inhibited TNF-a and IFN-?
production (Figure 8C). At day 2, TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine concentrations were about
30 pg/ml which is over a 30 fold decrease in production from that seen after 0 Gy alone.
Although there was a relative increase in TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine production (p<0.03)
after 2 Gy, levels of TNF-a and IFN-? were approximately 20 fold and 25 fold lower
with the NBD inhibitory peptide than with radiation alone (Figure 8C). In contrast, the
NBD peptide had no effect on radiation-induced IL-4 production (Figure 8C).
Similar results were seen for dendritic cell cytokine production as well. TNF-a
and IFN-? cytokine production rose after 1 day, peaked at 2 days and then started to
decline (Figure 8D). IL-4 production in unirradiated cells followed the same trend, but
declined after radiation at day 2 from 62.5 pg/ml to 46 pg/ml (p=0.0006) (Figure 8D).
The control peptide had no effect on cytokine production (Figure 8E). As before, the
NBD inhibitory peptide significantly inhibited TNF-a and IFN-? production in MLRs by
over 30 fold (Figure 8F) in cultures with and without irradiated dendritic cells. Again,
the level of IL-4 cytokine production was not significantly affected by cells pre-treated
with the NBD peptide (Figure 8F).
54
Effect of allogeneic MLR on cytokine positive T Cells, Monocytes and Dendritic
Cells
Intracellular cytokine production in monocytes was examined in order to
determine which cells, APC and/or T cells were producing the cytokines, using the same
methodology used for U937 cells and were stained with CD3, CD4, CD14, CDl lb, and
cytokine markers. Data again confirms that cytokines IL-4, IFN-? and TNF-a were
produced by CD4+ T cells. The percentage of cytokine positive CD4+ T cells is shown in
two-dimensional plots of cytokine versus CD4 (Supplementary Figure 10A).
Supplementary Figure 10B shows bar-graphs representative of cytokine positive CD4+ T
cells. The percentage ofcytokine positive monocytes is shown in two-dimensional plots
ofcytokine versus CD4 and in bar-graph form (Supplementary Figure IOC and D).
Similar experiments were performed with MLRs ofdendritic cells and CD4+T in which
cells were stained with CD3, CD4, Lin" and cytokine markers. The results demonstrated
that IL-4, IFN-?, and TNF-a were again produced by CD4+ T cells (Supplementary
Figures 1 IA and 1 IB). With both monocyts and dendritic cells, only small changes in
the percent of cytokine positive CD4+ T cells occurred after irradiation.
55
Discussion
Previous studies have shown that radiation has important effects beyond
cytotoxicity on immune cells, such as enhanced antigen presentation (Demaria et al.
Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership 2005; Friedman
2002), pro-inflammatory cytokine release (TNF-a, IL- Iß, IL-2) (Hallahan et al. 1989;
Hong et al. 1999; Ishihara et al. 1993; Rieser et al. 1997), and DC activation, which can
augment T cell mediated anti-tumor effects (Paulos et al. 2007). Radiation can also
stimulate dendritic cell maturation by prostaglandin E2 (PEG-2) and cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived
partnership 2005; McBride et al. 2004; McLellan, Brocker, and Kampgen 2000), which
enhance the overall "danger milieu." Other clinically relevant effects of radiation on the
tumor microenvironment (Lan et al. 2001) include stimulation ofAPC homing to
irradiated sites (Steinauer et al. 2000) by chemokine release (e.g. SDF-2) from irradiated
tumor cells (Teitz-Tennenbaum et al. 2008), and altered adhesion molecule expression by
irradiated endothelial cells, which promote leukocyte adhesion Chemotaxis (Cameron,
Spiess, and Rosenberg 1990; Ishihara et al. 1993; Trinchieri 2003; Zong et al. 2006).
Few direct immune enhancing effects of radiation have been described. Furthermore, it is
not well understood at the molecular level how radiation enhances tumor immunity,
especially with regard to important signaling changes that occur in APC. Thus the goal
of the experiments described here was to elucidate or identify early radiation-induced
signaling changes in antigen presenting cells and to elucidate the effects of these
signaling changes on APC responsiveness and function.
56
We first examined radiation-induced signaling changes in U937 cells and the
underlying mechanism (s) responsible for these changes. This cell line was chosen for
initial studies because (a) it has been widely used as a model for monocytes/macrophage
in differentiation vitro (Kim et al. 2004; Nikitina and Gabrilovich 2001) and (b) has been
used as a model for monocytic cells (Chakravarty et al. 1999; Magne et al. 2006; Verheij
and Bartelink 2000). U937 cells can be induced to undergo terminal monocytic
differentiation in mixed lymphocytes cultures, as well as by PMA, Vitamin D3, IFN-?,
and TNF-a (Baldwin 1996; Hayden, West, and Ghosh 2006). U937 cells display
hallmark characteristics ofAPC, and express basal levels ofmajor histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II and I as well as co-stimulatory molecules. For example, FACS
studies have shown upregulation ofMHC class II and I and co-stimulatory molecules
after stimulation by PMA (Buggins et al. 1999). Differentiated U937 cells also
phagocytose bacteria efficiently and are able to present bacterial antigen to CD8+ T cells
(Passmore, Lukey, and Ress 2001). U937 cells have a functionally inactive p53
(Scheidereit 2006), which allowed us to manipulate the p53 activity in these cells to
determine the role ofp53 in radiation-induced changes in the NFkB signal transduction
pathway. The data indicated that radiation and doxorubicin induced NFkB pathway
activation in U937 cells in a p53 independent manner. Furthermore, ATM inhibition
prevented radiation and doxorubicin, both known DNA damage inducers, from
phosphorylating and activating NEMO. In addition, radiation altered the redox status of
the cell as indicated by changes in the GSH:GSSG ratio, and lead to NFkB pathway
activation. However, with redox modifying agents, the effects ofROS on the NFkB
pathway were minimal. Based upon these findings, a model was developed to explain
57
the underlying etiology of XRT-induced effects on the NFkB pathway in U937 cells, in
which XRT induced double-strand breaks, resulting in phosphorylation ofATM, and
subsequent activation and phosphorylation ofNEMO. Phosphorylation ofNEMO
activates a downstream signaling cascade that results in phosphorylation ofNFkB. XRT
also produces ROS that indirectly contributes to for activation ofthe NFkB pathway in
U937 cells, but are not an absolute requirement for activation of this pathway. ROS can
damage DNA, result in double-strand breaks, and thereby phosphorylate ATM and
activate the NFkB signaling pathway. It is conceivable that ROS may also directly
phosphorylate NEMO, but this would be a minor pathway compared with the DSB-
mediated ATM pathway, as indicated by results showing little effect of redox status on
radiation (ROS) -induced changes on the NFkB pathway (Figure 9). The model
developed is based upon radiation-induced phosphorylation changes in the NFkB
pathway that were p53 independent in the human monocytic cell line. Though it is
known that radiation induced induction of downstream genes in the DNA damage
pathway which control cell cycle arrest (Canman et al., 1994) and programmed cell death
are dependent upon wildtype 53 ofwhich whose function may or may not require ATM.,
(though in most cases has been shown to require activation ofATM) (Morgan and Kastan
1997), evidence in other studies have shown that NFkB's interaction with p53 depdends
on the cell type (Bellas, Lee, and Sonenshein 1995; Mayo et al. 1997; Ravi et al. 1998;
Ryan et al. 2000; Wadgaonkar et al. 1999). In this case, ATM induced activation of p53
was not required for NFkB pathway activation. Future inhibition studies in human
PBMC could examine the relationship between ATM and p53 and how it affects
radiation-induced cativaiton ofthe NFkB pathwayThough other studies have shown the
58
radiation activates NFkB in a variety of cell types, it was important to show that radiation
does activate NFkB in a human monocytic cell line, since this line was used for the initial
functional radiation APC studies. Importantly, other studies have not examined the
functional significance of the NFkB pathway activation after radiation on immune
modulation or more specifically on the enhancement of immune responses as it relates to
APC activation. We did so using human PBMC from healthy donors to determine the
relevance ofour observations in U937 cells to mixed cell populations found in human
PBMC. In the past, changes at the molecular level have been difficult to elucidate in
PBMC because of exquisite radiosensitivity of some of the subpopulations present in
PBMC, resulting in very low numbers of viable cells following irradiation. However, we
were able to use phopsho-fiow cytometry (pFCS) to accurately and rapidly assess the
phosphorylation state of proteins within specific immune cellular subsets in complex,
heterogenous cell populations following irradiation (Wang et al. Co-activation of erk, nf-
kappab, and gadd45beta in response to ionizing radiation 2005). Importantly, pFCS also
provided information about the functional responses ofthese cells to radiation, which has
not been possible until very recently.
Our results demonstrate that the NFkB pathway is functionally important for
modulation ofU937 cells and APC subsets after radiation. Initial studies showed that
inhibition ofNEMO, a molecule upstream ofNFkB that initiates the signaling cascade,
diminished U937 cell responsiveness after radiation (as shown by decreased co-
stimulatory and MHC molecules expression), decreased T cell proliferation in MLR, and
decreased TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine production by T cells in MLR. Decreased IL-4
cytokine production by T cells after radiation was not changed by inhibition ofNEMO,
59
and it is not clear why radiation decreases IL-4 production. We hypothesize that IL-4
production is not regulated by NFkB, and that IL-4 might be able to suppress NFkB
activation, so inhibition of the NFkB pathway would have no effect on IL-4 production.
This is consistent with data from others suggesting that IL-4 can function as an inhibitor
ofNFkB activation (Ahn and Aggarwal 2005). Overall, our results demonstrate that
activation of the NFkB pathway is necessary for U937 responsiveness and/or enhanced
responsiveness after radiation. Ofnote, U937 cells have a 0.6% risk ofcontamination
with other cell lines, so a small amount of caution should be used in interpreting these
results.
In order to really determine to functional significance ofthe radiation-induced
NFkB pathway activation in immune modulation or enhancement of the immune
response, we examined the role of radiation-induced NFkB pathway activation in APC
subsets from healthy human PBMC. Cytokine production, co-stimulatory molecule
expression, and T cell proliferation were used as indicators ofAPC
activation/responsiveness, and demonstrated that the NFkB pathway activation is vital for
enhanced monocyte and dendritic cell responses after radiation. Radiation increased
co-stimulatory molecule expression and T cell proliferation in monocytes and dendritic
cells in MLR. Radiation also increased cytokine production ofTNF-a by monocytes
(which could also be produced by T cells) and IFN-? by T cells, while decreasing IL-4
production by T cells in supernatants from MLR. However, inhibition ofNEMO altered,
and in fact inhibited, the responsiveness of APC after radiation. This was shown by
inhibitory effects on co-stimulatory molecule expression and increased T cell
proliferation in MLR in which APC were pretreated with the inhibitor. Increased
60
cytokine production ofTNF-a and IFN-? was also inhibited by the NEMO inhibitor,
while there was no effect on EL-4 production. Inhibition ofTNF-a and EFN-? cytokine
production indicates that activation ofNFkB is important for monocyte and dendritic cell
function/responsiveness and for increased responsiveness after radiation. The
observation that IL-4 production was not altered by inhibition ofNFkB suggests that 11-4
production does not depend on NFkB activation with or without radiation. Overall,
these results strongly support the hypothesis that NFkB is vital for enhanced APC
responsiveness after radiation.
The role of radiation as an independent immune modulatory agent is an area of
active investigation. These results demonstrate an important mechanism by which
radiation enhances APC response and could directly enhance tumor immunity. Future
experiments will study the effect of local tumor irradiation on NFkB pathway signaling
changes in APC to further confirm these findings.
The results presented here provide important insight into how radiation affects
APC at the level of signal transduction pathways. Furthermore, these findings potentially
have important clinical relevance, since modulation of APC responsiveness through
signaling pathways such as NFkB, may allow for optimization of current immunotherapy
protocols that use radiation. Here we have demonstrated that the NFkB pathway is
activated by radiation and is necessary for U937 and PBMC APC responsiveness after
radiation. In addition, we have shown that activation of the NFkB pathway by radiation
is necessary for APC co-stimulatory molecule upregulation, APC maturation and
activation, pro-inflammatory cytokine expression/release, and enhanced T cell
61
proliferation following APC irradiation. These findings provide insight into the
mechanism(s) of radiation enhanced tumor immunity and have relevance for optimizing
the use of radiation for the purposes of immune modulation.
Prior to the work described in this thesis, only a few studies have tried to
characterize direct immune enhancing effects of radiation or determined functionally
relevant radiation-induced intracellular signaling changes at the molecular level that
occur in APC. Therefore, little has been known about why APC are relatively
radioresistant (compared to T cells) at the molecular level. This is clinically relevant
since these changes could alter clinical outcomes in patients' receiving radiotherapy. The
experiments performed in chapter 3 help to begin to elucidate these effects, which could
have near term translational potential.
62
A
? 1 **
** ,
30 **
? 20 "il II li
OOGv
¦2Gy
Q20GV
** r*i **
il .U
* * DOGy
-------) «2Gv
D 20Gy
NS
11
8 16
Time(hr) Time(hr)
_ so
** ONo
Doxorubicin
¦ Doxorubicin
(0.25uo,/ml)
** **
O
2 10Ul
¦ Doxorubicin
<0.25ug/ml)
Time(hr) Time (hr)
Figure 1. Phospho-flow cytometry determines phospho-specific changes in NFkB
pathway resulting from XRT and Doxorubicin in TJ937 cells.
(A) Treatment of U937 cells with XRT showed increased levels ofNFkB
phosphorylation in U937 and (B) NEMO phosphorylation 1-16 hrs after irradiation with
0, 2, and 20 Gy. (C) NFkB phosphorylation in U937 after 3 hrs with 0.25 µ^p?? of
Doxorubicin. (D) NEMO phosphorylation in U937 after 3 hrs with 0.25 µ^???
Doxorubicin. (A-D) *(p=<0.05), **(p=<0.01), ***(p=<0.001); and NS, not significant.
For all experiments, data is shown as normalized average MFLt S.E.M from three
independent experiments unless otherwise specified.
63
MaftL
Il
2 ÎO 0 2 20 0 2 IO Gy
16 Tim»{hrt
UlJ IU
0 2 ÎO 0 2
Figure 2. ROS levels modestly contribute to XRT-induced phosphorylation of
NEMO.
(A) Ratio of GSSG to GSH+GSSG (total GSH) in U937 cells 1-16 hrs after irradiation
with 0, 2, and 20 Gy. Data are shown as the average ratio +/- standard error from three
independent experiments. (B) Phosphorylation ofNEMO phosphorylation at 1-16 hrs
after (+) pre-treatment with 3.95µ? BSO for 3 hrs prior to 0, 2, or 20 Gy irradiation or (-
) radiation alone in U937 mutant cells (C) Phosphorylation ofNEMO at 1-16 hrs after
pre-treatment with 1OmM NAC for 3 hrs prior to 0, 2, or 20 Gy irradiation in U937
mutant cells. (B-C) *(p=<0.05).
64
IR (20Gy, 4hi|
Ku 55933
ATM deficient
U937 Cells GMOS36 Cells
S
o
E
-.· ¦ ? ? ¡ ? ? ? ? ? ;
in ill ill ill ?
Ku55933 (??µ?)
2 20 OZ 20 0220 0220 02 20Gy
1 4 8 16 24 Tim»(hr>
p-NEMO
NEMO
p-ATM
ATM
DNA-PKcs
ATR
|»-actin
4hr, OGy 4hr, 20Gy
? zo
O
I1!
Il Il Il Il Il
.+ .? .?-? .?.? .?.+ .?.? Ku-55933 (10µ?)
0 0.2S 0 0.25 0 0.2S 0 T.25 0 0.25 (D©«erubiti?] pigimi
1 4 6 16 24 Time<ht>
e
¦? e
8 8 1
i i !
« 5 " <
S S s
----- -V
pNEMO
NEMO
pATM
ATM
DNA-PK
ATR
p-actin
Figure 3. Phosphorylation of NEMO after XRT and Doxorubicin requires ATM.
(A) U937 cells treated with ??µ? Ku55933 (+) versus no inhibitor (-) prior to irradiation
(0, 2, or 20 Gy) at 1 -24 hrs. (B) Western blot analysis ofNEMO and ATM
phosphorylation in U937 and ATM deficient GM0536 cells, ß-actin served as a loading
control. (C) Phosphorylation ofNEMO and ATM were measured by western blot
analysis in untransfected U937 and U937+negative control siRNA cells. NEMO and
ATM were phosphorylated after treatment with 20 Gy but not in untreated (0 Gy) U937
65
cells. Radiation did not phosphorylate ATM or NEMO in ATM knocked down cells, ß-
actin served as a protein loading control. (D) U937 cells treated with ??µ? Ku55933
(+) versus no inhibitor (-) prior to 0.25µ{*/p?1 Doxorubcin at 1-24 hrs. *(p=<0.05),
**(p=<0.01), ***(p=<0.001); and NS: not significant.
66
A B
40
F35
1!
30 ?
io
II
IS
aOGvW
p
¦ 2Gï20
320Gv
IS
nWNS NS?HiIJd E 5 ?Stimulate* XRT alen· XRT*Control XRT*NBDRttpond
NBD
20 20 20 Gy20
CD80 C036MHC Class It CD40
Figure 4. XRT-induced maturation and responsiveness of U937 cells requires
NFkB.
(A) Inhibition of CD40, CD86, and MHC Class II phosphorylation at 48 hrs by NBD
peptide (+) versus no peptide (-) after 2 or 20Gy XRT compared to CD40, CD86, and
MHC Class II phosphorylation after XRT alone. NS=not significant, **(p=<0.01), and
***(p=<0.001). T cell proliferation was measured following combination ofCD4+ T
cells with irradiated (2 or 20 Gy) U937 cells and U937 pretreated with non-specific
control peptide increased T cell proliferation. Irradiated U937 cells pre-treated with
NBD peptide showed reduced T cell proliferation. Responder cells alone (purified CD4+
T cells), stimulator cells alone (irradiated U937 cells), and CD4+T cells were combined
with unirradiated U937 cells and served as negative controls. Shown is the average
absorbance (from triplicates)±S.E.M. from three independent experiments. *(p=0.05)
and **(p=<0.01).
67
<. 1600
— 1400
C
S 1200
¦g 1000
l· 800
IS 1600
a
~ 1400
O
= IK»
3
"g 1000
Q.
« BOO
-TNF a OGy
-TNF a 2Gv
-IFN ? OGy
-IFN 7 «y
-TNF a OGy
-TNF ? 2Gv
-IFN /OGv
-IFN 72Gv
— —IL-4 OGy
— — IL-4 2GV
-------- IL-4 0GV
— — IL-4 2GV
2 4
Days
-TNF a OGv
-TNF a 2Gy
-IFN ''0GV
-IFN 7 2GV
"g 20
IL-4 OGy
------- IL-4 2Gy
Figure 5. Supernatants from allogeneic MLR demonstrate XRT enhances TNF-ot
and IFN-? cytokine production, but not IL-4.
Unirradiated and irradiated U937 cells were combined with purified CD4+ T cells, in a
1 (APC): 10(T) ratio and on days 1, 2, 4, and 6, supernatants were used to assay IL-4,
TNF-ot, and IFN-? cytokine production via ELISA. Concentrations ofcytokines were
measured as pg/ml. (A) TNF-a and IFN-? cytokine production after 0 Gy and 2 Gy. (B)
IL-4 cytokine production before and after radiation (2 Gy). (C) Supernatant TNF-a and
IFN-? cytokine concentrations from MLR where U937 cells were pre-treated with control
68
peptide before 0 or 2 Gy). (D) IL-4 cytokine concentration from supernatants ofthe
same MLR as Figure 5C. (E) Shows inhibition ofTNF-a and IFN-? cytokine
production where U937 cells were pre-treated with NBD peptide before mock-irradiation
or irradiation and combining with CD4+ T cells. (F) Unchanged IL-4 cytokine
production from supernatants of the same MLR as Figure 5E. (A-F) Shown is the
average cytokine production (from triplicates) ±S.E.M. from three independent
experiments. **(P=<0.01) and ***(p=<0.0001).
12hr 48hr
OGy
2Gy
'U.. i,
CD80
12hr
NBD
+
OGy
NBD
+
2Gy
'*&&
0
48hr
4*
*e*
CD80
Fi
D Res pond« Celts
¦ Stimulator Cells
¦OGy
?- 2 Gv
nJj râJL- ci MA
XRT alen· XRT* Control XRT+NBD
f*]M t G? ¦ I ? Il
XRT alone XRT* Control XRT+NBD
O Responder Cells
¦ Stimulator Colts
¦OGy
c 2Gy
Figure 6. APC increased CD80 and CD86 expression and responsiveness after XRT
is dependent on NEMO activation in allogeneic MLR.
Co-stimulatory molecule expression from monocytes was measured in monocytes
combined with CD4+ T cells in MLR. CD80, CD86, and CD80/86 expression from
69
gated CDH+CDl Ib+ cells before (top row) and after 2 Gy (bottom row) at 12 and 48
hours, shown as FACS plots without NBD peptide (A) and with (B) NBD peptide pre-
treatment. (C-D) NBD peptide inhibits T cell proliferation in MLR after XRT compared
to control MLR cultures. Cells were either treated with 0, or 2 Gy XRT alone or pre-
incubated with the control or NBD peptide for 12 hrs before adding CD4+ T cells.
Controls groups consisted ofresponder cells alone (purified CD4+ T cells), stimulator
cells alone (irradiated monocytes or dendritic cells), and CD4+T cells combined with
unirradiated monocytes or unirradiated dendritic cells in each treatment group. (C)
Increased T cell proliferation after XRT alone and control peptide+XRT by CD4+ T cells
incubated with irradiated monocytes when compared to CD4+ T cells incubated with
unirradiated monocytes from PBMC. NBD peptide+XRT resulted in decreased T cell
proliferation by CD4+ T cells incubated with irradiated monocytes when compared to
XRT alone and control peptide+XRT treatment groups. (D) Increased T cell proliferation
after XRT alone and control peptide+XRT by CD4+ T cells incubated with irradiated
conventional dendritic cells when compared to CD4+ T cells incubated with unirradiated
conventional dendritic cells from PBMC. NBD peptide+XRT resulted in decreased T
cell proliferation by CD4+ T cells incubated with irradiated conventional dendritic cells
when compared to XRT alone and control peptide+XRT treatment groups. (C-D) Shown
is the average absorbance (from triplicates) ±S.E.M. from five independent experiments.
**** (p=<0.0001).
70
r±:
Xl
<
"Responder Cells
¦ Stimulator Cells
¦OGy
o2Gy
n_i. 1 nJl·
XRT ¿Ion* XRT+Control XRT+NBD
Xl
<
a Responder Cells
¦ SttmulatorCeils
BOGy
Q 2Gy
r\JL· nJl· '-dLi
XRT alen« XRT+Control XRT+NBD
Figure 7. Responsiveness after XRT is dependent on NEMO activation in allogeneic
MLR Cultures from Whole Blood.
NBD peptide inhibits T cell proliferation in MLR after XRT compared to control MLR
cultures. Cells were either treated with 0, or 2 Gy XRT alone or pre-incubated with the
control or NBD peptide for 12 hrs before adding CD4+ T cells. Controls groups consisted
ofresponder cells alone (purified CD4+ T cells), stimulator cells alone (irradiated
monocytes or dendritic cells), and CD4+T cells combined with unirradiated monocytes or
unirradiated dendritic cells in each treatment group. (A) Increased T cell proliferation
after XRT alone and control peptide+XRT by CD4+ T cells incubated with irradiated
monocytes when compared to CD4+ T cells incubated with unirradiated monocytes from
whole blood. NBD peptide+XRT resulted in decreased T cell proliferation by CD4+ T
cells incubated with irradiated monocytes when compared to XRT alone and control
peptide+XRT treatment groups. (B) Increased T cell proliferation after XRT alone and
control peptide+XRT by CD4+ T cells incubated with irradiated conventional dendritic
cells when compared to CD4+ T cells incubated with unirradiated conventional dendritic
cells from whole blood. NBD peptide+XRT resulted in decreased T cell proliferation by
CD4+ T cells incubated with irradiated conventional dendritic cells when compared to
XRT alone and control peptide+XRT treatment groups. (A-B) Shown is the average
71
absorbance (from triplicates)±S.E.M. from three independent experiments. ***
(p=<0.001) and **** (p=<0.0001).
œ
«
C-Vs
\^
1
/^ JCv ï Ou«.v1
^ ÎO
1-j
/
OGv
".¥S J^ I*<.v
?
S
TMF ] :
1
a
NS
?
L, V
¦s
Days Days
Figure 8. XRT enhances Monocyte and Conventional Dendritic Cell response:
supernatants from allogeneic MLR demonstrate XRT enhances TNF-a and IFN-?
cytokine production in a NEMO dependent manner, but not IL-4.
(A-C) Monocytes (CDH+) were either treated with 0, 2, or 20 Gy XRT alone or pre-
incubated with the control or NBD peptide for 12 hrs. Following irradiation, cells were
73
incubateci for 12 hrs before adding CD4+ T cells for the MLR. (A) TNF-a, IFN-?, and
IL-4 cytokine production [pg/ml] before and after radiation without peptide. (B) with
control peptide, and (C) with NBD peptide
(D-F) Dendritic cells (Lin") were either treated with 0, 2, or 20 Gy XRT alone or pre-
incubated with the control or NBD peptide for 12 hrs before adding CD4+ T cells (D)
TNF-a, IFN-?, and IL-4 cytokine production before and after radiation without peptide,
(E) with control peptide, and (F) with NBD peptide (A-F) *(p=<0.05), ***(p=<0.001)
and ****(p=<0.0001). Shown is the average cytokine production (from triplicates)
±S.E.M. from five independent experiments.
74
\
ROS
NFkB
îi/\S\Jy
^ NEMO#ATM
Figure 9. XRT-induced activation of NFkB pathway requires ATM, but not ROS in
U937 cells.
Schematic of the mechanism of action for XRT-induced NFkB changes in U937 cells, in
which XRT induced double-strand breaks, results in phosphorylation ofATM, and
subsequent activation and phosphorylation ofNEMO. ROS may also directly
phosphorylate NEMO, but this would be a minor pathway.
75
References
Alderton, G. 2007. DNA damage is stressful. Nat Rev Cancer 7: 226-227.
Ahn, K. S. and B. B. Aggarwal. 2005. Transcription factor nf-kappab: A sensor for
smoke and stress signals. AnnNYAcadSci 1056: 218-33.
Baldwin, A. S., Jr. 1996. The nf-kappa b and i kappa b proteins: New discoveries and
insights. Anna Rev Immunol 14: 649-83.
Bellas, R. E., J. S. Lee, and G. E. Sonenshein. 1995. Expression of a constitutive nf-
kappa b-like activity is essential for proliferation of cultured bovine vascular
smooth muscle cells. JClin Invest 96, no. 5: 2521-7.
Brody, J. D., M. J. Goldstein, D. K. Czerwinski, and R. Levy. 2009.
Immunotransplantation preferentially expands t-effector cells over t-regulatory
cells and cures large lymphoma tumors. Blood 1 13, no. 1: 85-94.
Buggins, A. G., N. Lea, J. Gaken, D. Darling, F. Farzaneh, G. J. Mufti, and W. J. Hirst.
1999. Effect of costimulation and the microenvironment on antigen presentation
by leukemic cells. Blood 94, no. 10: 3479-90.
Cameron, R. B., P. J. Spiess, and S. A. Rosenberg. 1990. Synergistic antitumor activity of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, interleukin 2, and local tumor irradiation. Studies
on the mechanism of action. JExp Med 171, no. 1: 249-63.
76
Chakravarty, P. K., A. Alfieri, E. K. Thomas, V. Beri, K. E. Tanaka, B. Vikram, and C.
Guha. 1999. Flt3-ligand administration after radiation therapy prolongs survival
in a murine model of metastatic lung cancer. Cancer Res 59, no. 24: 6028-32.
Canman, C. E., A. C. Wolff, C. Y. Chen, A. J. Fornace, Jr., and M. B. Kastan. 1994. The
p53-dependent gl cell cycle checkpoint pathway and ataxia-telangiectasia.
Cancer Res 54, no. 19: 5054-8.
Demaria, S., N. Bhardwaj, W. H. McBride, and S. C. Formenti. 2005. Combining
radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership. Int JRadiât Oncol Biol
Phys 63, no. 3: 655-66.
Demaria, S. and S. C. Formenti. 2007. Sensors of ionizing radiation effects on the
immunological microenvironment of cancer. Int JRadiât Biol 83, no. 11-12: 819-
25.
Friedman, E. J. 2002. Immune modulation by ionizing radiation and its implications for
cancer immunotherapy. Curr Pharm Des 8, no. 19: 1765-80.
Gallucci, S. and P. Matzinger. 2001. Danger signals: Sos to the immune system. Curr
Opin Immunol 13, no. 1: 114-9.
Ganss, R., E. Ryschich, E. Klar, B. Arnold, and G. J. Hammerling. 2002. Combination of
t-cell therapy and trigger of inflammation induces remodeling of the vasculature
and tumor eradication. Cancer Res 62, no. 5: 1462-70.
77
Hallahan, D. E., D. R. Spriggs, M. A. Beckett, D. W. Kufe, and R. R. Weichselbaum.
1989. Increased tumor necrosis factor alpha mrna after cellular exposure to
ionizing radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86, no. 24: 10104-7.
Harris, P. and P. Ralph. 1985. Human leukemic models of myelomonocytic development:
A review ofthe hl-60 and u937 cell lines. JLeukoc Biol 37, no. 4: 407-22.
Hayden, M. S., A. P. West, and S. Ghosh. 2006. Nf-kappab and the immune response.
Oncogene 25, no. 51: 6758-80.
Ho, E., G. Chen, and T. M. Bray. 1999. Supplementation of?-acetylcysteine inhibits
nfkappab activation and protects against alloxan-induced diabetes in cd-1 mice.
FASEB J 13, no. 13: 1845-54.
Hong, J. H., C. S. Chiang, C. Y. Tsao, P. Y. Lin, W. H. McBride, and C. J. Wu. 1999.
Rapid induction ofcytokine gene expression in the lung after single and
fractionated doses of radiation. /mí Ji?ai#a/ BiolTS, no. 11: 1421-7.
Ishihara, H., K. Tsuneoka, A. B. Dimchev, and M. Shikita. 1993. Induction ofthe
expression ofthe interleukin-1 beta gene in mouse spleen by ionizing radiation.
Radiât Res 133, no. 3: 321-6.
Kim, K. W., S. H. Kim, J. G. Shin, G. S. Kim, Y. O. Son, S. W. Park, B. H. Kwon, D. W.
Kim, C. H. Lee, M. Y. Sol, M. H. Jeong, B. S. Chung, and C. D. Kang. 2004.
Direct injection of immature dendritic cells into irradiated tumor induces efficient
antitumor immunity. Int J Cancer 109, no. 5: 685-90.
78
Koren, H. S., S. J. Anderson, and J. W. Larrick. 1979. In vitro activation of a human
macrophage-like cell line. Nature 279, no. 571 1: 328-31.
Lan, F., D. Zeng, M. Higuchi, P. Huie, J. P. Higgins, and S. Straber. 2001. Predominance
ofnkl.l+tcr alpha beta+ or dx5+tcr alpha beta+ 1 cells in mice conditioned with
fractionated lymphoid irradiation protects against graft-versus-host disease:
"Natural suppressor" Cells. JImmunol 167, no. 4: 2087-96.
Larsson, M., J. F. Fonteneau, and N. Bhardwaj. 2001. Dendritic cells resurrect antigens
from dead cells. Trends Immunol 22, no. 3: 141-8.
Magne, N., R. A. Toulon, V. Bottera, C. Didelot, P. V. Houtte, J. P. Gerard, and J. F.
Peyron. 2006. Nf-kappab modulation and ionizing radiation: Mechanisms and
future directions for cancer treatment. Cancer Lett 231, no. 2: 158-68.
Matzinger, P. 2002. The danger model: A renewed sense of self. Science 296, no.
5566: 301-5.
Mayo, M. W., C. Y. Wang, P. C. Cogswell, K. S. Rogers-Graham, S. W. Lowe, C. J. Der,
and A. S. Baldwin, Jr. 1997. Requirement ofnf-kappab activation to suppress
p53-independent apoptosis induced by oncogenic ras. Science 278, no. 5344:
1812-5.
McBride, W. H., C. S. Chiang, J. L. Olson, C. C. Wang, J. H. Hong, F. Pajonk, G. J.
Dougherty, K. S. Iwamoto, M. Pervan, and Y. P. Liao. 2004. A sense of danger
from radiation. Radiât Res 162, no. 1: 1-19.
79
McLellan, A. D., E. B. Brocker, and E. Kampgen. 2000. Dendritic cell activation by
danger and antigen-specific t-cell signalling. Exp Dermatol 9, no. 5: 313-22.
Morgan, S. E. and M. B. Kastan. 1997. P53 and atm: Cell cycle, cell death, and cancer.
Adv Cancer Res 7 1 : 1 -25 .
Muul, L. M., C. Silvin, S. P. James, and F. Candotti. 2008. Measurement of proliferative
responses of cultured lymphocytes. Curr Protoc Immunol Chapter 7: Unit 7 10 1-
7 10 24.
Nikitina, E. Y. and D. I. Gabrilovich. 2001. Combination of gamma-irradiation and
dendritic cell administration induces a potent antitumor response in tumor-bearing
mice: Approach to treatment ofadvanced stage cancer. M J Cancer 94, no. 6:
825-33.
Nordberg, J. and E. S. Arner. 2001. Reactive oxygen species, antioxidants, and the
mammalian thioredoxin system. Free Radie Biol Med 3 1, no. 1 1 : 1287-3 12.
Olive, P. L. and J. P. Banath. 2004. Phosphorylation ofhistone h2ax as a measure of
radiosensitivity. bit JRadiât Oncol Biol Phys 58, no. 2: 331-5.
Passmore, J. S., P. T. Lukey, and S. R. Ress. 2001. The human macrophage cell line u937
as an in vitro model for selective evaluation ofmycobacterial antigen-specific
cytotoxic t-cell function. Immunology 102, no. 2: 146-56.
Paulos, C. M., C. Wrzesinski, A. Kaiser, C. S. Hinrichs, M. Chieppa, L. Cassard, D. C.
Palmer, A. Boni, P. Muranski, Z. Yu, L. Gattinoni, P. A. Antony, S. A.
Rosenberg, and N. P. Restifo. 2007. Microbial translocation augments the
80
function ofadoptively transferred self/tumor-specific cd8+ 1 cells via tlr4
signaling. J Clin Invest \ 17, no. 8: 2197-204.
Rahman, L, A. Kode, and S. K. Biswas. 2006. Assay for quantitative determination of
glutathione and glutathione disulfide levels using enzymatic recycling method.
NatProtoc 1, no. 6: 3159-65.
Rieser, C, G. Bock, H. Klocker, G. Bartsch, and M. Thurnher. 1997. Prostaglandin e2
and tumor necrosis factor alpha cooperate to activate human dendritic cells:
Synergistic activation of interleukin 12 production. JExp Med 186, no. 9: 1603-8.
Ravi, R., A. Bedi, and E. J. Fuchs. 1998. Cd95 (fas)-induced caspase-mediated
proteolysis of nf-kappab. Cancer Res 58, no. 5: 882-6.
Ryan, K. M., M. K. Ernst, N. R. Rice, and K. H. Vousden. 2000. Role ofnf-kappab in
p53-mediated programmed cell death. Nature 404, no. 6780: 892-7
Scheidereit, C. 2006. Ikappab kinase complexes: Gateways to nf-kappab activation and
transcription. Oncogene 25, no. 51: 6685-705.
Siebenlist, U., G. Franzoso, and K. Brown. 1994. Structure, regulation and function ofnf-
kappa b. Annu Rev Cell Biol 10: 405-55.
Steinauer, K. K., I. Gibbs, S. Ning, J. N. French, J. Armstrong, and S. J. Knox. 2000.
Radiation induces upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2) protein in pc-3 cells.
Int JRadiât Oncol Biol Phys 48, no. 2: 325-8.
Strickland, I. and S. Ghosh. 2006. Use ofcell permeable nbd peptides for suppression of
inflammation. Ann Rheum Dis 65 Suppl 3: ¡Ü75-82.
81
Sundstrom, C. and K. Nilsson. 1976. Establishment and characterization of a human
histiocytic lymphoma cell line (u-937). Int J Cancer 17, no. 5: 565-77.
Teitz-Tennenbaum, S., Q. Li, R. Okuyama, M. A. Davis, R. Sun, J. Whitfield, R. N.
Rnibbs, L. M. Stoolman, and A. E. Chang. 2008. Mechanisms involved in
radiation enhancement of intratumoral dendritic cell therapy. J Immunother 31,
no. 4: 345-58.
Teitz-Tennenbaum, S., Q. Li, S. Rynkiewicz, F. Ito, M. A. Davis, C. J. McGinn, and A.
E. Chang. 2003. Radiotherapy potentiates the therapeutic efficacy of intratumoral
dendritic cell administration. Cancer Res 63, no. 23: 8466-75.
Trinchieri, G. 2003. Interleukin-12 and the regulation of innate resistance and adaptive
immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 3, no. 2: 133-46.
Verhasselt, V., W. Vanden Berghe, N. Vanderheyde, F. Willems, G. Haegeman, and M.
Goldman. 1999. N-acetyl-1-cysteine inhibits primary human t cell responses at the
dendritic cell level: Association with nf-kappab inhibition. JImmunol 162, no. 5:
2569-74.
Verheij, M. and H. Bartelink. 2000. Radiation-induced apoptosis. Cell Tissue Res 301,
no. 1: 133-42.
Wang, T., Y. C. Hu, S. Dong, M. Fan, D. Tamae, M. Ozeki, Q. Gao, D. Gius, and J. J. Li.
2005. Co-activation of erk, nf-kappab, and gadd45beta in response to ionizing
radiation. JBiol Chem 280, no. 13: 12593-601.
82
Watters, D. 1999. Molecular mechanisms of ionizing radiation-induced apoptosis.
Immunol Cell Biol 77, no. 3: 263-71.
Zong, Z. W., T. M. Cheng, Y. P. Su, X. Z. Ran, N. Li, G. P. Ai, and H. Xu. 2006. Crucial
role of sdf-l/cxcr4 interaction in the recruitment of transplanted dermal
multipotent cells to sublethally irradiated bone marrow. JRadiât Res (Tokyo) 47,
no. 3-4: 287-93.
83
200 400 600 800 1000
Forward Scatter
4hr 16hr
?????-FITC
4hr 16hr
EMA
OGy
2Gy
20Gy
pNFkB-Alexa Fluor 488
Supplemental Figure 1. XRT-induced phosphorylation of NEMO and NFkB.
(A) Representative dot plots ofunstained forward versus side scatter gated U937 cells
and subsequent gating of live cells using Ethidium Monoazide (EMA) in unirradiated
84
sample. Gated histograms of cells stained with NEMO or NFkB. Shown are
representative histograms ofU937 p53 mutant cells at 4hr and 16hr phosphorylation of
(B) NEMO and (C) NFkB before and after 2 and 20 Gy.
85
?No NAC
Tìme(hr)
2Gy
20Gy
2Gy
I OGy
12Gy
BSO+2Gy
20Gy
?????-FITC
I OGy
120Gy
BSO+20GV
Time(hr)
OGy
2Gy
NAC+2Gy
?????-FITC
; ¦ OGy
,.-I B20Gy
"' NAC+20Gy
Supplemental Figure 2. Redox-modulatory agents BSO and NAC effect on GSH
levels and histograms of BSO and NAC on XRT-induced phosphorylation of
NEMO.
(A) GSH levels at l-16hrs after treatment with 3.95µ? BSO for 3 hrs or 1OmM NAC
treatment for 3 hrs in U937 mutant cells. *(p=<0.05) and **(p=<0.01). For all
experiments, data is shown as the normalized average MFI±S.E.M. for three independent
experiments unless otherwise noted. (B) Representative histograms of 3.95µ? BSO+
XRT versus XRT alone changes in phosphorylation ofNEMO at Ihr. (C)
86
Representative histograms of 1OmM NAC+ XRT versus XRT alone changes in
phosphorylation ofNEMO at Ihr.
—:— Ku+OGy
- — Ku*2Gy
— ?— Ku*20Gy
16 24
Time(hr)
? t Ti^S:
8 16
Time(hr)
NS --0Cv
? 3 -Q-2G»
-Ù-20Gy
—-— KuH)Gv
NS Ku+2Gv
-t— Ku*20Gy
NS
ì :
--0Gv
-0-2GV
-o-20Gv
— _— KirKIGv
------- Ku*2Gy
—'—Ku*20Gv
16 24
Time(hr)
Supplemental Figure 3. Kinetics of Ku 55933 effects on XRT-induced
phosphorylation of CHK2, CHKl, and DNA-PK.
(A) Phosphorylation of CHK2 in U937 cells 1-24 hrs after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20
Gy or with ATM inhibitor (Ku 55933) pre-treatment before irradiation. (B)
Phosphorylation of CHKl in U937 cells 1-24 hrs after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20 Gy or
with ATM inhibitor (Ku 55933) pre-treatment before irradiation. (C) Phosphorylation of
DNA-PK in U937 cells 1-24 hrs after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20 Gy or with ATM
inhibitor (Ku 55933) pre-treatment before irradiation. (A-C) NS=not significant,
*(p=<0.05) and ** (p=<0.01). .
87
B
70 NS
60
iL
CM50 OGv
FCM
-^-20Gv* 40 ? 1(ß^o -û— OGv ONEMO¦s m 30
¦ gamma HzAX-O- 20Gy\
?
20 ^D-
UJ 3 =10 1
S 1$1 81 16
Time(hr) Time(hr)
Supplemental Figure 4. Correlation between ??2?? and NEMO phosphorylation
profiles after XRT.
(A) Phosphorylation ofyH2AX (? and D) and NEMO (o and x) in U937 cells l-16hrs
after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20 Gy. *(p=<0.05), ** (p=<0.01), and ***(p=<0.001),.
(B) Fold induction of??2?? and NEMO after 20 Gy XRT.
88
U937+P53
U937+vector
p-actjn
O 0.75 1 2 Mg/ml Doxorubicin
— p21
¦p21
r ? ?—I
ri rí
? 1
rí li
UOGv
¦2Gv
a 20Gv
JD
4hr 16hr
?????-FITC
4hr 16hr
10° TO' Vf W3 10' « TO
------------------- pNFkB-Alexa Fluor 488
OGy
2Gy
20Gy
1 " ,*** »..[*"
•?I
?-? OGy
¦ 2Gy
20Gy
I
? 1^1 1 fi
il
('OGv
•2Gv
CÎOGy
Supplemental Figure 5. XRT-induced phosphorylation of NEMO and NFkB is p53
independent.
(A) Restoration of p53 function in U937 cells. Measurement ofp21 by western blot
analysis in doxorubicin-treated U937 cells transfected with p53 or an empty vector. The
p53 transfected U937 cells exhibited dose-dependent p21 upregulation while the empty
89
vector control cells did not. ß-actin served as a protein loading control. (B) Treatment
ofU937 cells with XRT showed increased levels ofNEMO phosphorylation in U937 p53
wildtype cells 1-16 hrs after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20 Gy and (C) levels ofNFkB
phosphorylation in U937 p53 wildtype cells 1-16 hrs after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20
Gy. (B-C) NS=not significant, *(p=<0.05), **(p=<0.01), and ***(p=<0.001). (D-E)
Shown are representative histograms ofU937 p53 wildtype cells at 4hr and 16hr
phosphorylation of (D) NEMO and (E) NFkB before and after 2 and 20 Gy. (F-G)
Empty vector cells do not alter XRT-induced changes of in NFkB pathway in U937 p53
mutant cells. (F) Levels ofNEMO phosphorylation in U937 empty vector cells 1-16 hrs
after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20 Gy. (G) Levels ofNFkB phosphorylation in U937
empty vector cells 1-16 hrs after irradiation with 0, 2, and 20 Gy. (F-G) *(p=<0.05),
**(p=<0.01), ***(p=<0.001).
un 4 ri ri ri
£ 40 ¦ * * Vl 40 * *
3 1 .
? No Doxorubicin ^* 30 H JM ^. a No Doxorubicin
¦Doxorubicin (0.25ugfmi) E H H H H ¦ Doxorubicin (0.25ugiml)
O »
Time(hr) Time(hr)
Supplemental Figure 6. Doxorubicin-induced phosphorylation of NEMO and NFkB
pathway is p53 independent.
(A) Levels ofNEMO phosphorylation in wildtype p53 U937 cells 3 hrs after 0.25µg/ml
Doxorubicin treatment 0, 2, and 20 Gy. (B) Levels ofNFkB phosphorylation in
90
wildtype p53 U937 cells 3 hrs after 0.25 µ?*/p?1 Doxorubicin treatment 0, 2, and 20 Gy.
(A-B) **(p=<0.01), ***(p=<0.001), and ****(p=<0.0001).
CD40
OGy
2Gy
2OGy
PMA
CD80
HLA-DR
U- 10
Il
-/+ +
? 1
Il I
¦4* * ConUol/NBD
Supplemental Figure 7. XRT increases expression of co-stimulatory and MHC
molecules on U937 cells.
(A) Shown are representative histograms of increased expression ofCD40, CD86, HLA-
DR, and PMA (positive control) before and after 48 hours XRT. (B) NBD inhibitory
peptide does inhibit XRT-induced phosphorylation ofNFkB pathway. Control
91
experiment shows level of IkBoc phosphorylation in U937 cells after irradiation with 0 or
20 Gy alone (-)and pre-treatment with control peptide (-/+) or NBD peptide (+) before 0
or 20 Gy at 0 and 48 hrs. NS=not significant, **(p=<0.01), and ***(p=<0.001).
92
IL-4 TNF-a IFN-?
0 0430 094
2Gy ?s1
a io* io* io* io5 0 10* 103 10* 10s 0 10* 10* 10* 10s
NS
??
Qi
«J
O
U
a?
>
(?
O
O.
100
SO
NS fi
líiGy
02Gy
TNF-alpha IFN-gamma
Supplemental Figure 8. Intracellular cytokines ??G-a, IFN-?, and IL-4 are
produced by CD4+ T cells in allogeneic MLR.
U937 cells and CD4+ T cells that were combined in MLR were pooled according to their
radiation dose of 0 Gy or 2 Gy at 48 hours and activated with Leukocyte Activation
Cocktail and Monensin for 4 hours before surface marker and intracellular cytokine
93
staining. (A) Two-dimensional plots of the percentage ofcytokine positive CD4+ T cells
versus CD4. (B) Shows bar-graph representation of the mean positive IL-4, TNF-a, and
EFN-? T cells. Shown are the average percentages ofpositive cells±S.E.M. from three
independent experiments. NS=not significant and **(p=<0.01).
0 12 24 48 72 96 120 144 hours
-**#>···_..
10OuM NBD peptide g
O 60
XRT (2OGv) J
DOSy CD80/CD86
¦2Sy CD80/CD86
nNBD*0Gv CD80ICDS6
ONBD* 2Gy CD80ICD86
Time(hr)
Supplemental Figure 9. Increased CD80 and CD86 expression by Monocytes is
dependent on NEMO activation in allogeneic MLR.
(A) NBD inhibitory peptide does inhibit activation ofNFkB pathway. Control
experiment shows western blot ofNBD peptide inhibition of IkBa in monocytes that
were pre-treated before XRT. (B) Co-stimulatory molecule expression from monocytes
was measured in monocytes combined with CD4+ T cells in MLR. (B) The mean
CD80/86 expression percentages from unirradiated and irradiated monocytes at 12 and 48
hours. Shown is the average percentage ±S.E.M. from five independent experiments.
****(p=<0.0001).
94
IL-4 IFN-
OGy
·" \ 1 ·¦¦ U^ 0Gy
tí io3 m* w* o W=" »' m*
TNF-a
• n> «> .d'
?
2Gy »·?
2Gy'
H? W* »* D 10* 10* 10* 1·*
CD14
B NS
^ "° ^-
V)
_ __ «
¦
« 1 ^B >
O ^^" ^^m Q-
Q. IL-4 IFN-gjmma
Supplemental Figure 10. IFN-? and IL-4 are produced by CD4+ T cells and TNF-a
by monocytes in allogeneic MLR.
Monocytes and CD4+ T cells that were combined in MLR were pooled according to their
radiation dose of0 Gy or 2 Gy at 48 hours and activated to detect intracellular cytokine
staining. (A) Two-dimensional plots of the percentage ofcytokine versus CD4. (B)
Shows bar-graph representation ofthe mean positive IL-4 and IFN-? T cells. (C) Two-
dimensional plots of the percentage of cytokine versus CD 14. (D) Shows bar-graph
representation ofthe mean positive TNF-a monocytes. Shown are the average
95
percentages ofpositive cells±S.E.M. from five independent experiments. NS=not
significant and *(p=<0.05).
A
B
F?
o
o
f
'35
o
a.
IL-4 IFN-? TNF-a
o to2 to1 io· H)
NS
TNF-alpha IFN-gamma
Supplemental Figure 11. TNF-o, IFN-? and EL-4 are produced by CD4+ T cells in
allogeneic MLR.
Dendritic Cells and CD4+ T cells that were combined in MLR were pooled according to
their radiation dose of 0 Gy or 2 Gy at 48 hours and activated to detect intracellular
cytokine staining. (A) Two-dimensional plots of the percentage of cytokine versus CD4.
(B) Shows bar-graph representation of the mean positive IL-4, TNF-a, and EFN-? T cells.
96
Shown are the average percentages of positive cells±S.E.M. from five independent
experiments. NS=not significant, *(p=<0.05), and **(p=<0.01).
CHAPTER 3
DIFFERENTIAL BAX EXPRESSION IS A DETERMINANT OF RADIOSENSITIVITY IN T
CELLS AND ANTIGEN PRESENTING CELL SUBSETS
Abstract
Studies have shown that changes in host T cell immunity play an important role in
graft versus host disease and graft versus leukemia effects. However, studies of the effect
of radiation on the balance of immune cells have been primarily focused on T cell
subsets. The mechanisms for the relative radioresistance ofhuman memory T cells and
APC subsets specifically monocytes and dendritic cells, are not well understood. The
experiments described here demonstrate a hierarchy of radiosensitivity among T cells,
with naive CD8 T cells being the most radiosensitive and CD4 memory T cells being the
most radioresistant. In addition, APC were found to be significantly more radioresistant
(up to a 150 fold more) than T cell subsets, and among APC, monocytes were more
radiosensitive than either total or conventional dendritic cells. T cells and APC both
demonstrate varying propensities to undergo apoptotic death after radiation as indicated
by differential levels of Bax expression. Although ultimate survival of the
"radioresistant" cell subsets is also diminished, the short term shifts in subset ratios
modify the post-radiation immune system in a manner that is relevant to
immunomodulatory therapies.
98
Introduction
Both myeloablative and non-myeloablative radiation can be an important
component ofpreparatory regimens for hematopoetic stem cell transplantion used to treat
patients with hereditary and malignant diseases. For instance, some studies have used
non-myeloablative techniques, such as total lymphoid irradiation, in which the major
lymph node groups and spleen are irradiated to prevent rejection ofthe allogeneic donor
cells by residual host immune cells (Field and Strober 2001; Mielcarek et al. 2003), and
facilitate engrafted donor T cells mediated graft anti-tumor activity, and tumor cell
eradication (Lan et al. 2003; Lan et al. 2001; Luznik et al. 2003; Maris et al. 2004).
Radiation causes significant lymphodepletion due to the marked sensitivity of
lymphocytes to irradiation. Furthermore, radiation is known to increases antigen
presentation (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived
partnership 2005; Friedman 2002), causes pro-inflammatory cytokine release (TNF-a,
IL-lß, IL-2) (Hallahan et al. 1989; Hong et al. 1999; Ishihara et al. 1993; Rieser et al.
1997), stimulates "danger response" pathways (Steinauer et al. 2000), induces dendritic
cell maturation by known inducers prostaglandin E2 (PEG-2) and cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) (Demaria et al. Combining radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived
partnership 2005; Rieser et al. 1997; Steinauer et al. 2000), promotes anti-tumor effects
ofT cells via DC activation (Paulos et al. 2007; Ren et al. 2006) and stimulates APC
homing to irradiated sites (Teitz-Tennenbaum et al. 2008). These effects are dependent
99
upon radiation-induced immune modulation, the understanding ofwhich is rudimentary
in terms ofthe effects of radiation on specific immune cell subsets and their functions.
More recent studies have shown that the T cell subset depletion by myeloablative
or non-myeloablative radiation is not uniform, due to the differential sensitivity of
immune cell subsets to radiation induced cell death (Anderson et al. 2004; Yao et al.
2009). As a result, the balance ofT cell subsets is altered after non-myeloablative or
myeloablative irradiation, with increased survival of regulatory T cells,including CD4+
natural killer (NK) T cells and CD4+CD25+ Treg cells, as compared to conventional
(CD4 and CD8 T cells) (Fuks and Slavin 1981; Higuchi et al. 2002; Joffre et al. 2008;
Pillai et al. 2007; Straber 1987). This has been observed in mice conditioned with non-
meyloablative total lymphoid irradiation and anti-thymocyte globulin, in which there was
a relative increase in regulatory NKT cells and CD4+CD25+ Treg cells in the immediately
post-transplantation period (Edinger et al. 2003; Kohrt et al. 2009; Lan et al. 2003; Lan et
al. 2001; Tamada et al. 1998). This change in the T celi subset balance provides graft
versus leukemic (GVL) benefits without the risk of acute graft versus host disease
(GVETO). This approach can result in successful engrafhnent of allogeneic bone marrow
or peripheral stem cell transplants after nonmyeloablative irradiation, and is dependent in
part on the survival of residual NK T cells and CD4+CD25+ Treg cells that suppress
alloreactivity of residual host conventional T cells (Higuchi et al. 2002; Joffre et al.
2008).
Previous studies have shown that the selective effect of radiation on T cell subsets
is partially due to the differential expression ofanti-apoptotic proteins. NKT cells in mice
have been reported to express high levels ofanti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2
100
constitutively, and to upregulate these proteins after exposure to irradiation or exposure
to glucocorticoids (Seino, Harada, and Taniguchi 2004; Tamada et al. 1998; Yao et al.
2009) . Other studies have demonstrated that the expression of Bc1-2 suppresses the p53
mitochondrial-mediated apoptotic pathway, and thymocytes from mice with an
inactivated Bcl-2 gene are dramatically more sensitive to radiation induced cell death
than thymocytes from wild type mice (Veis et al. 1993). In contrast, mice overexpressing
Bcl-2 were markedly more resistant to radiation induced cell death (Domen, Gandy, and
Weissman 1998). Other data suggests that irradiation ofT cells results in upregulation of
pro-apoptotic Bax expression, but without any alteration in the level of Bcl-2 expression
(Ame, Spenlehauer, and de Murcia 2004)
Importantly, monocytes/macrophages, and dendritic cells have been found to be
present immediately post stem cell transplantion, and are more radioresistant than T cells.
Studies to date have not determined the etiology of the relative radioresistance of antigen
presenting cells, in particular monocytes and dendritic cells, or the potential role of the
p53 mitochondrial-mediated apoptotic pathway as a mediator of the radioresistance of
these important immune cell subpopulations. The primary objectives ofthe experiments
described here were to further elucidate radiation-induced changes in the balance of
human T cell subsets including CD4+ and CD8+ total T cells, CD4-CD8- T cells, CD4+
naïve and memory T cells, and CD8 naïve and memory T cells, 2) determine if there is a
selective difference in human antigen presenting cell subsets including monocyte and
dendritic cells after radiation, and 3) study the role ofBax and Bcl-2 expression in the
relative radioresistance of antigen presenting cells.
101
Materials and Methods
Cells and Culture
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) (obtained from buffy coats by the
Stanford Blood Center, Palo Alto, California) were cultured in human tissue cultured
medium (RPMI- 1640 medium supplemented with 10% human serum (heat-inactivated
for Ihr at 550C), 2mM glutamine, 100U penicillin/ml, 100µ§ streptomycinml) in a
humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C with normal oxygen content or under
hypoxic conditions (2% O2).
Irradiation
Cells were irradiated with ?-rays using a 137Cs source emitting at a fixed dose rate of 53 1
cGy/min.
Monoclonal Antibodies and Chemical Reagents
Anti-HLA-DR-PerCP, Anti-CD3-V450, Anti-CD3-FITC, Anti-CD4-PE, Anti-CD45RA-
PE-Cy7, Anti-C62L-APC, Anti-Lineage Negative Cocktail-FITC, Anti-Alexa Fluor 700-
CDl lb, Anti-CDl lc-V450, Anti-CD 14-APC, Anti-Cleaved PARP-Alexa Fluor 647,
Anti-DcBa-PE, Anti-BCL-2-FITC, Anti-Bax-PE, Anti-Bax-PerCP-Cy5.5, APO-Direct Kit
(FTIC-dUTP), FACS stain buffer, and Anti-Mouse IgK/Negative Control (FBS)
Compensation Particles Set (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) and Anti-CD8-Qdot 655,
and LIVE/DEAD fixable dead cell stain kit in Aqua (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA).
Chemical reagents were as follows: 70% ethanol for permeabilization with APO-Direct
Kit, 100% Methanol (Stanford Biosciences), 16% Paraformaldehyde (Electron
102
Microscopy Sciences, Hartfield, PA) (used at 1.5%) for intracellular staining, and Ficoll-
Paque Plus (GE Healthcare Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ).
Flow cytometry analysis
Human PBMC layers were isolated from buffy coats using Ficoll-Hypaque density
gradient centrifugation. Buffy coats (8-10 mis) were diluted with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS). Diluted blood was layered onto Ficoll-Hypaque and centrifiiged at 2,000 ?
rpm. Mononuclear layers were removed and washed three times with PBS at 1200 ?
rpm. Counted cells were aliquoted for treatment with 0 or 20 Gy, incubated for 0-96hrs,
and viable cells were counted at various timepoints before staining. LIVE/DEAD fixable
green dead cell stain (1:1000 in PBS) was added prior to surface marker staining and
analysis to exclude dead cells.
To analyze intracellular IkBa, Bcl-2, Bax, and cleaved PARP, all cells were first
incubated with LIVE/DEAD aqua stain, washed twice with PBS, and stained with the
appropriate anti-surface receptor mAbs in FACS stain buffer. Cells were fixed with 1.5%
paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 4°C 100% methanol while vortexing, washed
with FACS stain buffer twice and incubated with intracellular antibodies at room
temperature for 30 minutes. For TUNEL (Anti-BrdU) staining by phospho-flow
cytometry to detect fragmented DNA using the APO-Direct Kit (BD Biosciences, San
Diego, CA per manufacturer's instructions. Cells were fixed with 1.5%
paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with ice cold 70% ethanol, incubated with DNA
labeling solution (reaction buffer, TdT enzyme, FITC-dUTP, and distilled water), washed
with rinse buffer, and analyzed. Positive and negative control cells were provided for
103
TUNEL staining. Thresholds for staining (surface and intracellular) were determined
using isotype-matched mAbs. All analyses were performed using the LSRII in the
Shared FACS Facility (Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine at Stanford
University). Resultant data was analyzed using FlowJo software (TreeStar, Ashland,
OR).
Statistical analysis
Difference in absolute number, percent and fold change of immunophenotypic
populations of cells were analyzed using the two-tailed Student's /-test (GraphPad
Sofware, San Diego, CA). For all tests, ? value of 0.05 or less was considered significant.
104
Results
Effect of irradiation on different T cell subsets from healthy donor human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
In order to determine the effect of radiation on human PBMC, cells were treated
with 0 or 20 Gy (2000 cGy) and stained for subset surface markers following 0, 24, 48,
72, and 96 incubation. 0 hour timepoint refers to cells that were immediately processed
irradiation. Processing time was 2-3 hours. Figure IA shows representative examples
(out of 5 experiments) of two-color flow cytometric analyses of gated CD3+ T cells from
untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) human PBMC at 0 and 96 hours. When comparing
untreated to irradiated cells at 0 hours (), there was a negligible difference in total CD4+
T cells, total CD8+ T cells, and CD3+CD4"CD8" (DN) T cells. However, at 96 hours,
there was a modest increase in total CD4+ T cells from 54.5% to 63.9% after irradiation
and an associated decrease in the percentage of total CD8+ from 41.4% to 26.7% , with
an associated increase in DN T cells from 4.37% to 8.89%. At 96 hours the ratio of
CD4+:CD8+ cells changed from approximately 1:1 to about 3:1 following irradiation.
The mean CD4+, CD8+, and DN T cell percentages from unirradiated and irradiated
human PBMC at 96 hours are shown in Figure IB.
The relative increase in the percentage of CD4+ T cells as compared to the
decrease in the percentage of CD8+ T cells is explained by the greater decrease in the
absolute number ofCD8+ T cells compared to CD4+ T cells (Figure IC). By 96 hours
following 20Gy, the absolute number oftotal CD4+ T cells decreased by approximately
105
400 fold and the absolute number of CD8+ T cells decreased by about 1200 fold
compared with unirradiated control cells (p=<0.0001) (Figure ID).
Radiation changes the T cell subset balance to favor effector memory CD4+ T cells
Figure 2A shows representative examples oftwo-color flow cytometric analyses
for naive (CD45RA+CD62L+) and effector memory (CD45RACD62L) cells of gated
CD4+T cells from untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) human PBMC at 0 and 96 hours. At 0
hours there was a small decrease in naive cells from 72.7% to 62.6% and a small increase
in effector memory cells from 8.55% to 1 1.4% compared to unirradiated control cells.
There was a substantial decrease in naive cells after irradiation from 57.6% to 7.02% and
corresponding increase in effector memory cells from 19.5% to 45.2% at the 96 hour
timepoint. Figure 2B shows representative examples of two-color flow cytometric
analyses for naive (CD45RA+CD62L+) and effector memory (CD45RACD62L) cells of
gated CD8+T cells from untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) CD3+ T cells at 0 and 96 hours.
Immediately following irradiation, there was a small decrease in CD8+T naive cells from
67.4% to 57.3% and a small increase in effector memory cells from 7.63% to 16.3%.
There was a substantial decrease in naive cells after irradiation from 46.2 to 12.3% and a
substantial associated increase in effector memory cells from 21.3% to 35.8% at 96
hours, with a change in the naive CD4+:CD8+ ratio from about 1:1.5 to about 1:2, while
the CD4+:CD8+ ratio stayed at 1:1 for effector memory cells. The mean percentages for
naive CD4+ and CD8+ cells and effector memory CD4+ and CD8+ from unirradiated and
irradiated human PBMC at 96 hours are shown in Figure IC. Overall, after irradiation
106
there are more effector memory cells than naïve cells, although there is a greater
percentage of CD4+ than CD8+ effector memory cells (Figure 2C).
The higher percentage of naive CD8+ T versus CD4+ T cells after irradiation can
be explained by a greater decrease in the absolute number ofnaïve CD4+ T cells.
Furthermore, the greater increase in effector memory CD4+T cells can be explained by a
smaller decrease in the absolute number ofeffector memory CD4+ T cells versus effector
memory CD8+ T cells as shown in Figure 2D. Overall, there is a greater decrease in
naïve T cells compared to effector memory T cells after irradiation. When unirradiated
cells were compared to irradiated cells at 96 hours, the absolute number ofnaïve CD4+ T
cells decreased by approximately 1500 fold and the absolute number ofnaïve CD8+ T
cells decreased by about 1800 fold (p=<0.0001). In addition, the absolute number of
effector memory CD4+ T cells decreased by approximately 60 fold whereas the effector
memory CD8+ T cells decreased by approximately 90 fold ((p=0.006)) (Figure 2E).
Effect of irradiation on different APC subsets from healthy donor human PBMC
Figure 3A shows representative examples oftwo-color flow cytometric analyses
for monocytes (HLA-DR+CDl Ib+CDH+) from untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) human
PBMC at 0 and 96 hours. Immediately following irradiation, there was a small decrease
in monocytes from 72.5% to 69.6% (0 hours) and a small decrease in monocytes from
7 1 .8% to 5 1 .4% at the 96 hour timepoint. Figure 3B shows representative examples of
one-color flow cytometric analyses for total dendritic cells (Lin-, Side Scatter) from
untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) human PBMC at 0 and 96 hours. There was a small
increase in total dendritic cells from 2.37% to 2.39% at 0 hours and an increase from
107
2.6% to 4.35% at 96 hours after radiation. The ratio of total dendritic cells increased
from 1:1 to 1:2 after radiation. Figure 3C shows representative examples of two-color
flow cytometric analyses for conventional dendritic cells (HLA-Dr+, CDl Ic+) from
untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) gated Hn- cells at 0 and 96 hours. Initially radiation
resulted in a small decrease in conventional dendritic cells from 78% to 73.1% and after
96 hours a significant increase in conventional dendritic cells from 74.7% to 91.9%. The
mean percentages for monocytes, total dendritic cells, and conventional dendritic cells
from unirradiated and irradiated human PBMC at 96 hours are shown in Figure 3D. The
absolute number ofmonocytes was larger (Figure IE) than dendritic cells (Figure 3F and
3G), but decreased more than dendritic cells after radiation. At 96 hours following
irradiation the absolute number ofmonocytes decreased by approximately 8 fold and the
absolute number oftotal dendritic cells decreased by approximately 2 fold (p=<0.0001).
In addition, the absolute number of conventional dendritic cells decreased by
approximately 2 fold (Figure 3H).
Increased cleaved PARP activity indicates T cells die by apoptosis, and their
radiosensitivity could be due to lack of ???a activity.
We next studied the potential role of???a activation, an upstream target ofNFkB
that is necessary for translocation ofNFkB to the nucleus to transcribe genes and its
potential interaction with PARP (downstream target of the caspase-mediated apoptotic
pathways) following irradiation in CD8+ and CD4+T cells, in order to try to better
understand the etiology ofthe relative radiorsensitivity of CD8+ T cells. Cells were
treated with 0 Gy and 20 Gy (200OcGy) and stained for subset surface makers, as well as
108
intracellular ???a and cleaved PARP at O, 1, 4, 8, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours. PARP was
chosen for study because the catalytic activity ofPARP is increased in cells following
DNA damage and plays an important role in normal cellular response to DNA damage.
In addition it is the target of the capsase protease activity associated with apoptosis and is
cleaved by Caspase 3 during apoptosis (Ame, Spenlehauer, and de Murcia 2004;
Darzynkiewicz et al. 1997). Representative examples of two-color flow cytometric
analyses of???a+ and PARP+ in unirradiated and irradiated gated CD4+ T cells and
CD8+ T cells at 0 and 96 hours are shown in Figure 4A and 4B, respectively. Initially,
there was no difference in the percentage of cleaved PARP+ CD4+ T or CD8+ T cells or
???a+ CD4+ T or CD8+ T cells. However, at 96 hours post irradiation, the level of
cleaved PARP+ CD4+ T cells increased from 0.55% to 45.5%, with an increase in
cleaved PARP+ CD8+ T cells from 0.28% to 49.5% at 96 hours. At 96 hours there was
no significant difference in the ratio of cleaved PARP+CD4+: cleaved PARP+CD8+,
although the mean percentage of cleaved PARP+CD8+ T cells was greater than cleaved
PARP+CD4+T cells (p=0.042253) (Figure 4C), which can be explained by the larger
absolute number ofcleaved PARP+ CD8+ T cells (Figure 4D) after 20 Gy radiation than
CD4+ T cells (Figure 4E). At 96 hours following irradiation, the absolute number of
cleaved PARP+ CD4+ T cells increased by approximately 1 80 fold and the absolute
number ofcleaved PARP+ CD8+T cells increased by about 220 fold (p=0.0055) (Figure
4F). There was no increase in the absolute number of ???a+ CD4+T or CD8+T cells after
irradiation at the 96 hour timepoint (Figure 4F). There was no evidence of interaction
between ???a and PARP, since ???a expression did not increase with PARP.
109
Decreased PARP activity and increased ???a activity may contribute to APC
radioresistance.
Next radiation-induced cleaved PARP and ???a expression were studied in APC
subsets. Cells were treated with 0 Gy and 20 Gy (200OcGy) and stained for subset
surface makers, as well as intracellular for ???a and cleaved PARP at 0, 1, 4, 8, 24, 48,
72, and 96 hours. Representative examples of two-color flow cytometric analyses of
LcBa+ and PARP+ in unirradiated and irradiated (20 Gy) gated monocytes and Hn"
dendritic cells at 0 and 96 hours are shown in Figure 5A. Initially, there were no cleaved
PARP+ monocytes or conventional dendritic cells and only 0.78% ???a+ conventional
dendritic cells. There was also no increase in cleaved PARP+ monocytes or conventional
dendritic cells after irradiation at 96 hours (Figure 5A and 5B). However, there was a
dramatic increase in ???a+ monocytes from 0.008% to 75.6% and in conventional
dendritic cells from 0% to 83.7% after irradiation at the 96 hour timepoint (Figure 5A and
5B). However, at 96 hours there was no significant difference in the ratio of LcBa+
monocytes: LcBa+ conventional dendritic cells, although the mean percentage of LcBa+
conventional dendritic cells was greater than LcBa+ monocytes (p=0.017) following
radiation (Figure 5C). In addition, though cleaved PARP+ cells did not increase after
irradiation, there was an increase in LcBa+ PARP+ cells. The LcBa+ PARP+ cells
increased in monocytes from 0% to 24.4% (Figure 5A) and increased slightly less from
0% to 16.3% in conventional dendritic cells (Figure 5B) after irradiation at 96 hours. The
mean percentage OfIKkBa+ PARP+ monocytes was greater than the mean percentage of
LcBa+ PARP+ conventional dendritic cells (Figure 5C) which can be explained by the
larger absolute number of LcBa+ PARP+ monocytes (Figure 5D) than conventional
110
dendritic cells (Figure 5E). At 96 hours following irradiation, the absolute number of
IkBcC+ monocytes had increased by approximately 55 fold and the absolute number of
???a+ conventional dendritic cells increased by about 20 fold (p=<0.0001) (Figure 5F).
The absolute number of???a+ PARP+ monocytes increased by approximately 21 fold
and the absolute number of ???a+ PARP+ conventional dendritic cells increased by about
4 fold (p=0.0003) (Figure 5F). When unirradiated cells were compared to irradiated cells
at 96 hours, there was no increase in the absolute number OfPARP+ monocytes or PARP+
conventional dendritic cells (Figure 5F).
CD8+ T cells are more sensitive to radiation-induced apoptosis than CD4+ T cells.
Next, the level ofBax and TUNEL expression in T cells were measured following
irradiation. Cells were treated with 0 Gy and 20 Gy (200OcGy) and stained for subset
surface makers as well as intracellular Bax and TUNEL at 0, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hours.
Figure 6A shows representative examples oftwo-color flow cytometric analyses of Bax+
and/or TUNEL+ gated CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells from untreated and irradiated (20
Gy) human PBMC at 0 and 24 hours. Compared to untreated cells at 0 hours, there was a
small increase in the percentage ofBax+ CD4+ T cells from 0.1% to 0.62% and in CD8+
T cells from 0.96% to 0.98% following irradiation. The change in TUNEL+ CD4+ T cells
or CD8+ T cells was negligible. Bax+CD4+ T cells decreased from 85% to 67.9% after
irradiation and there was a significantly greater decrease in the percentage ofBax+ CD8
T cells from 93.2% to 16.2% at the 24 hours. The decrease in Bax+ cells corresponded
with an increase in TUNEL+ and BaX+TUNEL+ cells at the 24 hour timepoint. There was
a greater increase in TUNEL+ CD8 T from 0.07% to 5 1 .4% than TUNEL+ CD4+ T cells
111
(0.007% to 12.3%) at 24 hours. BaX+TUNEL+ CD4+ T cells and BaX+TUNEL+ CD8+ T
cells increased from 0.2 to 16.4% and 1 .2% to 28.1% at 24 hours, respectively. At 24
hours the ratio of Bax+CD4+:Bax+CD8+ changed from 1:1 to 4:1; the ratio of
TUNEL+CD4+: TUNEL+ CD8+ cells increased from 1:1 to 1:5; and the ratio of
Bax+TUNEL+CD4+: Bax+TUNEL+CD8+ decreased from 1:5 to 1:2 following irradiation
(Figure 6A). Overall, the mean percentage ofBax+CD8+ T cells was less than Bax+CD4+
T cells (p=0.0045), but the mean percentage OfTUNEL+ CD8 +T cells was significantly
greater than CD4+ T cells, and the mean percentage ofBaX+TUNEL+ CD8+ T cells was
greater than BaX+TUNEL+ CD4 T cells after irradiation at 24 hours (Figure 6B)
Overall, the decrease in the percentage of Bax+ T cells at 24 hours after irradiation
can be explained by the increased absolute number OfTUNEL+ and BaX+TUNEL+ T
cells. Decreased numbers of Bax+ CD8+ T cells (Figure 6C) relative to CD4+ T (Figure
6D) cells can be attributed to the larger number OfTUNEL+ CD8+ T cells (Figure 6C)
than CD4+T cells (Figure 6D) present 24 hours after irrdaition. By 24 hours after
irradiation, the absolute number of Bax+ CD4+ T cells was approximately 2 fold lower
than in unirradiated cells, while the absolute number ofBax+ CD8+T cells was 10 fold
less (p=<0.0003) (Figure 6E). In contrast, the absolute number OfTUNEL+ CD4+T cells
increased by 58 fold and the absolute number OfTUNEL+ CD8+T cells increased by
approximately 145 fold (p=<0.0001). There was also a 57 fold increase in the absolute
number ofBaX+TUNEL+ CD4+T cells compared with a 13 fold increase in BaX+TUNEL+
CD8+T cells (p=<0.00022) after irradiation (Figure 6E). Overall, there were more
apoptotic CD8+ T cells than CD4+ T cells.
112
Conventional dendritic cells are slightly more radioresistant than monocytes.
APC were more resistant to radiation-induced apoptosis than T cells. In order to
better understand this relative radioresistance, Bax and TUNEL activation was assessed
in monocyes and conventional dendritic cells treated with 0 Gy and 20 Gy (200OcGy) and
stained for subset surface makers, as well as intracellular Bax and TUNEL at 0, 1, 4, 8,
and 24 hours. Figure 7A shows representative examples of two-color flow cytometric
analyses of Bax+ and/or TUNEL+ gated monocytes and conventional dendritic cells from
untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) human PBMC at 0 and 24 hours. There was no
significant difference in the percentage ofBax+ or TUNEL+ monocytes or conventional
dendritic cells before or after irradiation at 0 hours. By 24 hours after irradiation there
was an increase in Bax+ monocytes (were 11%) and Bax+ conventional dendritic cells
(7.5%). However, there was only 2.1% TUNEL+ monocytes and 1.5% conventional
dendritic cells. The ratio ofBax+ monocyes:Bax+ conventional dendritic cells changed
slightly from 1:1 to 1.5:1.following irradiation (Figure 7A). At 24 hours, the mean
percentage ofBax+ monocytes was greater than Bax+ conventional dendritic cells, but
this difference was not statistically significant (p=0.153). The mean percentage of
TUNEL+ monocytes was greater than TUNEL+ conventional dendritic cells (p=0.156) and
the mean percentage of BaX+TUNEL+ monocytes cells was greater than BaX+TUNEL+
conventional dendritic cells, although neither difference was statistically significant
(p=.201) (Figure 7B).
The absolute number ofBax+, TUNEL+ and BaX+TUNEL+ monocytes after
irradiation at 24 hours (Figure 7C) was greater than the absolute numbers for
conventional dendritic cells (Figure 7D). Comparison ofuntreated versus irradiated
113
cells at 24 hours, resulted in a increase in the absolute number ofBax monocytes by
approximately 2 fold, whereas the absolute number ofBax+ dendritic cells increased by
about 1 fold (p=0.04) after irradiation (Figure 7E). There was a 26 fold increase in the
absolute number OfTUNEL+ monocytes cells compared to a 15 fold increase in the
absolute number OfTUNEL+ conventional dendritic cells (p=0.001), and a 7 fold increase
in the absolute number ofBaX+TUNEL+ monocytes compared to a 2 fold increase in
BaX+TUNEL+ conventional dendritic cells (p<0. 1 26) after radiation at 24 hours (Figure
7E). Overall, monocytes expressed higher levels ofBax and TUNEL than conventional
dendritic cells after irradiation but the magnitude ofBax+, TUNEL+, and BaX+TUNEL+
APC after irradiation is significantly less than that observed in T cells.
Radiation increased expression of Bax in T cell subsets while Bcl-2 expression
remained relatively constant.
Next, we compared the level of intracellular expression ofBcl-2 and Bax in T
cells subsets after irradiation at O, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hours. Bax and Bcl-2 expression has
been shown in previous studies to peak with quantitative PCR in immune cells before 24
hours (Yao et al. 2009). Shown are representative examples of one-color flow cytometric
analyses ofBcl-2+ versus Side Scatter gated CD4+ T cells from untreated and irradiated
(20 Gy) human PBMC at 0 and 24 hours (Supplemental Figure IA). Similar analyses
were performed for gated CD8+ T cells (Supplemental Figure IB). Supplemental Figure
IC shows flow cytometric analyses ofBax+ versus Side Scatter gated CD4+ T cells and
gated CD8+ T cells (Supplemental Figure ID) from untreated and irradiated (20 Gy)
human PBMC at 0 and 24 hours. Isotype controls at 24 hours after 20 Gy showed no
114
detectable Bax+ and/or Bcl-2+ CD4+ or CD8+ T cells. Immediately after radiation there
was a small decrease in the percentage ofBcl-2+ CD4+ T cells from 78.1% to 76.3% and
at 24 hours there was a small decrease in Bcl-2+ CD4+ T cells from 68.4% to 64.5%
(Supplemental Figure IA). There was a minimal decrease in Bcl-2+ CD8+ T cells from
71.4% to 70.4% immediately after radiation and a small decrease from 66.6% to 63.6% at
the 24 hour timepoint (Supplemental Figure IB). Because the magnitude ofthese
changes was so small, there were no significant changes in the ratio of Bcl-2+CD4+: BcI-
2+CD8+ cells. The percentage ofBax+ CD4+ T cells only increased from 17.1% to 18.9%
at 0 hours, but by 24 hours there was an increase in Bax+ CD4+ T cells from 19.6% to
32.7% (Supplemental Figure IC). Bax+ CD8+ T cells increased from 23.2% to 23.8% at
0 hours and from 24.6% to 50.2% at 24 hours (Supplemental Figure ID). Therefore, the
ratio of Bax+CD4+:Bax+CD8+ increased from 1:1 to 1:1.5, and the relative proportion of
Bax+ CD8 cells doubled by 24 hours (Supplemental Figure IC and ID) . Mean
percentages ofBcl-2 Io and hi CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and Bax Io and hi CD4+ and CD8+
T cells at 24 hours are shown in Figure IE and Figure IF, respectively.
The difference in absolute number ofBcl-2 Io CD4+ or Bcl-2 hi CD4+T cells
before and after irradiation at 24 hours was not statistically different. Similar results were
obtained with CD8+T cells (Supplemental Figure IG). However, the absolute number of
Bcl-2 hi CD4+ T cells was greater than Bcl-2 hi CD8+ T cells, and there was not a
statistically significant difference in the absolute numbers ofBax Io CD4+ T cells after
irradiation. However, absolute number ofBax hi CD4+ T cells after irradiation increased
(p=0.0004) at 24 hours. The lower percentage ofBax Io CD8+ T cells after irradiation
can be explained by a lower absolute number of Bax Io CD8+ T cells (p=0.002). The
115
higher absolute number ofBax hi CD8+ T cells is a reflection of the higher absolute
number ofBax hi CD8+ T cells after irradiation at 24 hours (p=0.003) (Supplemental
Figure IH).
At 24 hours, the absolute number of Bcl-2 Io CD4+ T and CD8+T cells both
increased by approximately 1 fold after irradiation (p=.195), while the absolute number
ofBcl-2 hi CD4+ T and Bcl-2 hi CD8+T cells decreased by about 1 and 1.5 fold
respectively (p=0.058) (Supplemental Figure II). Bax Io CD4+ T and CD8+ T cells
decreased by about 1.5 and 2 fold, respectively (p=.434) . In contrast, the absolute
number of ofBax hi CD4+ T cells increased by about 3 fold and the absolute number of
Bax hi CD8+ T cells increased by approximately 6 fold (p=<0.001 1) (Supplemental
Figure U). Though there is a slight difference in absolute Bcl-2 hi numbers of CD4 and
CD8 T cells after radiation, proportionally it is minimal when compared to the magnitude
ofchange ofBax expression in the cell subsets.
Effect of radiation on Bax and Bcl-2 expression in APC subsets.
Intracellular expression ofBax and Bcl-2 were examined in APC subsets as well.
As above, cells were treated with O Gy and 20 Gy (200OcGy) and stained for subset
surface makers as well as intracellular Bax and Bcl-2 at 0, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hours.
Represented is one-color flow cytometric analyses ofBcl-2+ versus Side Scatter gated
monocytes (Supplemental Figure 2A), Bcl-2+ versus Side Scatter gated conventional
dendritic cells (Supplemental Figure 2B), Bax+ versus Side Scatter gated monocytes
(Supplemental Figure 2C), and Bax+ versus Side Scatter gated conventional dendritic
cells (Supplemental Figure 2D) from untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) human PBMC at 0
116
and 24 hours. Isotype controls at 24 hours after 20 Gy showed no detectable Bax+ and/or
Bcl-2+ monocytes or conventional dendritic cells. At 0 and 24 hours there were very
small decreases in the percentage of Bcl-2+ monocytes (89.4% to 88.8% and 85.2% to
82.7%, respectively) after radiation (Supplemental Figure 2A). Similarly, there were also
very small decreases in Bcl-2+ conventional dendritic cells from 94.1% to 90.2%
immediately after radiation and a small decrease from 93.2% to 86.5% at 24 hours
(Supplemental Figure 2B). In addition, there was no significant change in the ratio of
Bcl-2+monocytes: Bcl-2+conventional dendritic cells (1:1) 24 hours following radiation
(Supplemental Figure 2A and Figure 2B). Immediately after radiation there was a very
small increase in the percentage of Bax+ monocytes from 7.1 1% to 7.59%, but at 24
hours Bax+ monocytes increased from 7.59% to 18.4% (Supplemental Figure 2C). Bax+
conventional dendritic cells increased from 4.27% to 8.14% at 0 hours, with a much more
marked increased from 4.51% to 17.3% at 24 hours (Supplemental Figure 2D). The ratio
ofBax+monocytes:Bax+conventional dendritic cells again remained at 1:1 24 hours after
radiation, although the proportion of Bax+ monocytes and conventional dendritic cells
after irradiation increased (Supplemental Figure 2C and 2D) . At 24 hours the mean
percentage ofBcl-2 Io monocytes and conventional dendritic cells increased slightly and
the mean percentage of Bcl-2 hi monocyes and conventional dendritic cells decreased
slightly after irradiation, though the decrease in Bcl-2 hi conventional dendritic cells was
not statistically significant (Supplemental Figure 2E). Although the mean percentage of
Bcl-2 Io monocytes was greater than Bcl-2 Io conventional dendritic cells after irradiation
(p=0.055) and the mean percentage of Blc-2 hi monocytes was less than Bcl-2 hi
conventional dendritic cells 24 hours after irradiation (p=0.281), with no statistically
117
significant differences (Supplemental Figure 2E). In addition, the mean percentage of
Bax Io monocytes and conventional dendritic cells decreased after irradiation, while the
mean percentage of Bax hi monocytes and conventional dendritic cells increased after
irradiation at 24 hours. The mean percentage of Bax Io monocytes was less than Bax Io
conventional dendritic cells (p=0.552) and the mean percentage ofBax hi monocytes was
greater than Bax hi conventional dendritic cells (p=0.692), but again these differences
were not statistically different (Supplemental Figure 2F).
At 24 hours, the difference in absolute number of Bcl-2 Io monocytes before and
after irradiation was not statistically different (p=.1830). The slightly lower percentage
ofBcl-2 hi monocytes corresponded to a lower absolute number of Bcl-2 hi monocytes
after irradiation (p=0.0022) (Supplemental Figure 2G). After irradiation, there was a
higher absolute number ofBcl-2 Io conventional dendritic cells, which was neglible
(p=0.059). The difference in absolute number of Bcl-2 hi conventional dendritic cells
before and after irradiation was not statistically significant (p=0.361) (Supplemental
Figure 2G). In addition, the difference in absolute number of Bax Io monocytes before
and after radiation was not statistically significant (p=0.132). There was a negligible
decrease in the absolute number ofBax hi monocytes cells at 24 hours (p=0.214). The
change in absolute number of Bax Io conventional dendritic cells before and after
radiation was not statistically significant (p=0.05 1). The higher percentage ofBax hi
conventional dendritic cells after irradiation can be explained by a higher absolute
number ofBax hi conventional dendritic cells after irradiation (p=0.009) (Supplemental
Figure 2H).
118
In comparison at 24 hours, the absolute number of Bcl-2 Io monocytes decreased
by about 2 fold, while Bcl-2 Io conventional dendritic cells increased by approximately 1
fold (p=0.021) after radiation. In addition, the absolute number ofBcl-2 hi monocytes
decreased by about 1.5 fold and Bcl-2 hi conventional dendritic cells absolute number
decreased by about 1 fold (p=0.054) (Supplemental Figure 21). When compared, the
absolute number ofBax Io monocytes decreased by about 3 fold and the absolute number
of Bax conventional dendritic cells decreased by approximately 2 fold (p=.005). Also,
the absolute number of Bax hi monocytes increased by abouti fold and the absolute
number of Bax hi conventional dendritic cells also increased by approximately lfold
(p=<0.0002) (Supplemental Figure 2J). There were more Bax+ monocytes than
conventional dendritic cells.
Increase in Bax expression as compared to Bax/Bcl-2 expression after irradiation
makes CD8 T cells more radiosensitive than CD4 T cells.
Next, experiments were performed to determine how radiation affected the
number of Bax+ versus Bax+/Bcl-2+ cells after irradiation. Cells were treated with O Gy
and 20 Gy (200OcGy) and stained for subset surface makers as well as intracellular Bax
and Bcl-2 at 0, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hours. Representative examples oftwo-color flow
cytometric analyses of Bcl-2+ versus Bax+ gated CD4+ T cells (Supplemental Figure 3A)
and CD8+ T cells (Supplemental Figure 3B) from untreated and irradiated (20 Gy) human
PBMC at 0 and 24 hours show an initial small increase in the percentage of Bcl-2+ CD4+
T cells (2.16% to 2.49%) with a negligible decrease from 1.21% to 0.12% at 24 hours
(Supplemental Figure 3A). Bcl-2+ CD8+ T cells decreased from 2.1 1% to 2.92% at 0
119
hours, with no detectable Bcl-2+ CD8+ T cells by 24 hours after 20 Gy (Supplemental
Figure 3B), and no alteration in the ratio ofBcl-2+CD4+:Bcl-2+CD8+. At the 24 hour
timepoint there was a significant increase in Bax+ CD4+ T cells from 3.63% to 26.7%
(Supplemental Figure 3A). There was also a large increase in Bax+ CD8+ T cells from
6.98% to 37.4% at 24 hours (Supplemental Figure 3B). The ratio of
Bax+CD4+:Bax+CD8+ cells did not change (Figure 3B). In contrast while the percentage
of Bcl-2+Bax+ CD4+ T cells changed little (97.2% to 96.6%) immediately following
radiation, but markedly decreased from 95.2% to 73.3% at 24 hours (Supplemental
Figure 3A). Again, there was a negligible decrease in Bcl-2+Bax+ CD8+ T cells at 0
hours and a significant decrease in BcW+BaX+ CD8+ T cells from 90.3% to 62.6% at the
24 hour timepoint, with the ratio ofBcl-2+Bax+ CD4+: BcW+BaX+ CD8+ cells remaining
at 1:1 24 hours following
irradiation (Supplemental Figure 3B). Isotype controls at 24 hours after 20 Gy showed
no detectable Bax+ and/or Bcl-2+ CD4+ or CD8+ T cells.
Overall, there were very small decreases in mean percentages of Bcl-2+CD4+ and
Bcl-2+CD8+ T cells after irradiation at 24 hours. The mean percentage ofBax+ CD8+ T
cells was greater than Bax+CD4+ T cells (p=0.0002) at 24 hours after irradiation. The
mean percentage ofBax+Bcl-2+ CD4+ T cells was greater than the percentage ofBax+
Bcl-2+CD8+ T cells at 24 hours after irradiation (p=0.009) (Supplemental Figure Figure
10C). The absolute number ofBcl-2+ CD4+T and Bcl-2+ CD8+T cells after irradiation
decreased compared to unirradiated cells at 24 hours, while the absolute number of Bax+
cells (Bax+ CD8+ T > Bax+ CD4+ T ) cells significantly increased after irradiation at 24
hours (p=0.001 and 0.0017) (Supplemental Figure 3D). The absolute number ofBax+
120
Bcl-2+ CD4+ T and BaX+ Bcl-2+ CD8+ T cells decreased after irradiation at 24
hours(p=<0.05) (Supplemental Figure 3D). The number of Bax+ cells as compared to
Bcl-2+Bax+ cells was greater in CD8+ T cells than CD4+ T cells, (Supplemental Figure
3D) with a lower absolute number ofCD8+T cells than CD4 T cells after irradiation. As
shown in Figure 1OF, there was a larger fold change in Bax+ CD8+ T cells (8 fold) than
Bax+ CD4+ T cells (3.6 fold), while the fold change OfBcI^+BaX+ CD4 versus BcI-
2+Bax+ CD4 after irradiation was similar (~2 fold) (Supplemental Figure 3E).
Bax expression as compared to Bax/Bcl-2 expression is significantly less in
conventional dendritic cells and monocytes
APC were treated with 0 Gy and 20 Gy (200OcGy) and stained for subset surface
makers as well as intracellularly for Bax and BcI-2 at 0, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hours. Bcl-2+
monocytes decreased from 86.6% to 60% at 24 hours following irradiation
(Supplemental Figure 4A). Bcl-2+ conventional dendritic cells decreased from 89.2% to
60.9% at 24 hours (Supplemental Figure 4B). The ratio ofBcl-2+monocyes:Bcl-
2+conventional dendritic cells (1:1) was unchanged following irradiation. Changes in the
percentage ofBax+ monocytes and Bax+ conventional dendritic cells were very small and
statistically insignificant at both time points, (Supplemental Figure 4A and 4B) with no
change in the ratio ofBax+monocytes:Bax+conventional dendritic cells from 1:1 after
radiation at 24 hours. The percentage OfBcW+BaX+ monocytes increased from 10.9% to
30.7% at 24 hours (Supplemental Figure 4A). There was a larger increase in BcI-^+BaX+
conventional dendritic cells from 8.15% to 29.2% at the 24 hour timepoint (Supplemental
Figure 4B). Again, at 24 hours, the ratio of Bcl-2+Bax+ monocytes: BcI^+BaX+
121
conventional dendritic cells remained unchanged at 1 : 1 following irradiation. Isotype
controls at 24 hours after 20 Gy showed no detectable Bax+ and/or Bcl-2+ monocytes or
conventional dendritic cells.
Overall, the mean percentage of Bcl-2+ monocytes and Bcl-2+ conventional
dendritic cells decreased 24 hours after irradiation while the mean percentage ofBax+
monocytes and Bax+ conventional dendritic cells slightly increased at 24 hours
(Supplemental Figure 4C). At 24 hours after irradiation, the increase in Bax+ monocytes
was a little larger than Bax+ conventional dendritic cells (p=<0.0001). The small shift in
the mean percentage of Bax+Bcl-2+ monocytes compared to Bax+Bcl-2+ conventional
dendritic cells was not statistically different (p=.767) (Supplemental Figure 4C).
The decreased absolute number of Bcl-2+ monocytes after irradiation as compared
to unirradiated cells at 24 hours was statistically significant (p=0.036) (Supplemental
Figure 4D). The increased percentage ofBax+ monocytes may be explained by the
increase in the absolute number of Bax+ monocytes after irradiation as compared to
unirradiated cells at 24 hours (p=0.033) (Supplemental Figure 4D). There was an
increase in the absolute number ofBax+Bcl-2+ monocytes after irradiation as compared
to unirradiated cells at 24 hours, but this difference was not statistically significant
(p=0.289) (Supplemental Figure 4D). The absolute number ofBcl-2+ conventional
dendritic cells decreased (p=0.05) and the absolute number ofBax+ conventional
dendritic cells increased after irradiation as compared to unirradiated cells at 24 hours
(p=0.002) (Supplemental Figure 4E). There was an increase in the absolute number of
Bax+Bcl-2+ conventional dendritic cells after irradiation as compared to unirradiated
cells at 24 hours but it was not statistically significant (p=0.1004) (Supplemental Figure
122
4E). When unirradiated cells were compared to irradiated cells at 24 hours, the absolute
number of Bcl-2+ monocytes decreased by about 2 fold and the fold change in the
absolute number ofBcl-2+ conventional dendritic cells decreased by about 1.5 fold
(p=0.242) (Supplemental Figure 4F). Bax+ monocytes increased by approximately 2 fold
and the Bax+ conventional dendritic cells increased by about 1.5 fold (p=0.0245)
(Supplemental Figure 4F). The absolute number ofBcl-2+Bax+ monocytes and
conventional dendritic cells increased by about 2 fold (p=0.1053). Overall, there is a
larger fold change in Bax+ monocytes than Bax+ conventional dendritic cells, while the
fold change OfBcW+BaX+ CD4 versus BcW+BaX+ CD4 after irradiation was similar
(Supplemental Figure 4F). The higher absolute number and fold change ofBax+
monocytes as compared to Bax+ conventional dendritic cells versus BaX+BcW+ APC may
help to explain why monocytes are less radioresistant than dendritic cells.
123
Discussion
Although radiation is widely used as a component ofpreparatory regimens for
hematopoetic stem cell transplantation, the associated immunomodulatory effects are
poorly understood. The experiments described here were designed to further elucidate
the effects of radiation on the balance ofT cell and APC subsets during the critical
window, within 2-4 days, after radiation when immune modulation is likely to optimally
modify GVT or graft versus leukemia (GVL) effects.
Following irradiation, with 20 Gy, there was a selective loss (CD8 T > CD4 T) of
T cell subsets from healthy donor human PBMC. Radiation changed the balance
according to a hierarchy of radiation sensitivity with the naive T cells being the most
sensitive, followed by the CD4-CD8- T cells, and memory T cells, being the least
radiosensitive. There was also a selective loss ofAPC (monocytes > total and
conventional dendritic cells), although the magniture of the APC depletion was
substantially less than that observed in T cells. The loss ofT cells was influenced by the
expression of intracellular levels of Bax, which is expressed early in the caspase-
mediated apoptotic pathway and increases within the first few hours after radiation
(Murphy et al. 2002). This does not induce cell death alone, but elevated levels ofBax
accelerate apoptosis following a death signal (Oltvai, Milliman, and Korsmeyer 1993).
The selective loss ofT cells was influenced by the intracellular level ofBax. Overall,
CD8 T cells that expressed higher levels ofBax than CD4 T cells were more sensitive to
radiation with associated cell loss. Monocytes expressed higher levels of Bax than
dendritic cells, but overall APC expressed less Bax than T cells and were more
radioresistant (underwent less apoptotis) than T cells. These results demonstrate that Bax
124
plays an important role in the sensitivity ofT cells and APC to radiation-induced
apoptosis. Bax and Bcl-2 compete with each other to tip the balance to promote or
inhibit apoptosis, respectively. As a result, it was vital to examine Bcl-2 expression as
well. Bcl-2 plays a major role in regulating the cellular response to apoptotic signals.
Bcl-2 is considered to be a novel proto-oncogene because it blocks apoptosis in many cell
types and is thought to provide selective survival advantage for cells by blocking
apoptosis (Boise et al. 1995; Hockenbery et al. 1990; Krajewski et al. 1993; Williams
1991; Yang et al. 1997). Contrary to studies in mice where higher levels ofBcl-2
expression conferred a survival advantage for certain T cell subsets (Seino, Harada, and
Taniguchi 2004; Tamada et al. 1998; Yao et al. 2009), high levels ofBcl-2 expression in
human T cells from PBMC did not protect T cells from radiation-induced cell death. The
level of Bcl-2 in irradiated cells did not substantially change in CD4 or CD8 T cells after
irradiation, while the level of Bax expression significantly increased. Intrinsically APC
expressed higher levels ofBcl-2 which decreased slightly after radiation. Overall, this
data suggests that radiation-induced Bax expression played a role in selective depletion
ofT and APC cell subsets. Though other anti-apoptotic proteins including BcI-XL
(Boise et al. 1995), and their impact on T cell subset survival is the subject ofcontinuing
investigation, studies have not been performed on the role ofthese anti-apoptotic proteins
in APC survival.
In exploring the downstream target PARP, we found that the loss of T cells
correlated with the level of cleaved PARP. CD8 T cells that expressed higher levels of
cleaved PARP than CD4 T cells after irradiation underwent more radiation-induced
death. In contrast, cleaved PARP could not be detected in monocytes or conventional
125
dendritic cells following irradiation. Since previous studies in Chapter 2 showed that the
NFkB pathway is activated in APC and is known to inhibit apoptosis through
transcription of apoptotic inhibitor proteins, there could be an interaction between NFkB
activity and PARP activity after radiation. In these experiments, DcBa was used as a
marker ofNFkB activation, since DcBa activity is necessary for NFkB translocation to
the nucleus. However, based upon these results, there does not seem to be an interaction
between ???a and PARP, though ???a (via NFkB) could be interacting with more
upstream proteins in the apoptotic pathway.
One of the later steps in apoptosis is DNA fragmentation which is commonly
detected by "end-labeling" or "TUNEL" (terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase dUTP
nick end labeling) (Darzynkiewicz et al. 1997; Enari et al. 1998; Luznik et al. 2003;
Walker et al. 1993). T cell and APC subsets also expressed TUNEL after radiation,
further demonstrating that these cells were dying by apoptosis after radiation. As
expected, there was greater TUNEL expression in T cell subsets than APC, and the level
ofTUNEL expression in both T cell subsets and APC corresponded with their sensitivity
to radiation. Though APC are known to die by different mechanisms, such as mitotic
castastrophe (Brown and Attardi 2005), these results demonstrate that apoptosis plays an
important role in radiation-induced APC apoptosis and that the monocytes and dendritic
cells have different sensitivities to radiation.
In conclusion, radiation causes a selective loss of both T cell and APC subsets
following irradiation of fresh healthy donor human PBMC, with T cells being
significantly more radiosensitive than APC. This results in an altered balance ofT and
APC cell subsets in a hierarchical fashion based on the relative sensitivity of these
126
cellular subsets to radiation induced apoptosis, which correlates with the level of Bax
expression after irradiation, and not Bcl-2 in the p53 mitochondrial mediated apoptotic
pathway.
The changes described here are likely to have important functional effects on the
immune function, since radiation shifts the balance toward host memory T cells. The
enhanced effects ofhost memory T cells could increase the risk of allograft ransplant
rejection in hosts. In addition, the radioresistance ofAPC and selective loss of
monocytes as opposed to conventional dendritic cells results in an enhanced ratio of
APC: T cells and APC type (dendritic cells). Understanding that radiation the radiation-
induced shifts in the balance toward dendritic cells after radiation is important because
there may be increased priming capacity by DC of alloreactive T cells leading to
enhanced induction of cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses. Furthermore, we have
demonstrated in previous studies that the NFkB pathway is activated in dendritic cells
and enhances function ofdendritic cells after radiation, which could lead to increased risk
ofallograft rejection by the host or GVHD in transplant patients receiving radiation
therapy prior to hematopoetic stem cell transplantation, since radioresistant APC are
present within the early the post-transplant period. In contrast, where the radioresistance
ofmemory T cells and APC could be detrimental, supplemental methods (i.e. other
treatments), in addition to radiation, may be required to cytoreduce the radioresistant
subsets further. In addition, since Bax expression is lower in APC subsets, therapeutic
approaches to increase Bax expression to enhance radiation sensitivity and depletion of
APC subsets might also be clinically beneficial.
127
Elucidation of the underlying etiology ofAPC is critical for optimizing the use of
radiation for purposes of modulating APC function in order to improve clinical outcomes.
The mechanisms ofcell death, in which Bax plays an important role, could be useful for
determining outcomes after radiation as it relates to good GVT effects versus bad (tumor
recurrence and/or progression) GVT effects.
128
Ohr 96h r
, rf v/ W vf
*** ****
20Gv
I
-CD4+T
? Mf* te* nf t#
OGy CD4+
—j—20Cv CD4+
OGy COS+
20GV CDS+
—;—OGy DH
ZOGyDN
Time ihr)
-OGy CD4*
-20Gy CD4*
-OGy CDS+
-2OGy CD8+
24 48 72
Time (hr)
Time (hr)
Figure 1. Effect of irradiation on CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets.
(A) Gated CD3+ T cells from unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy
(bottom row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for CD4 versus CD8. (B)
The mean percentage (¿standard error) ofCD4+, CD8+, CD4CD8 - (DN) at 0, 24, 48, 72,
and 96hrs before and after 20Gy irradiation. (C) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard
error) for CD4+ T cells (upper panel) and CD8+ T cells (bottom panel) at 0, 24, 48, 72,
and 96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (D) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy)
versus unirradiated) (¿standard error) of different CD4+ and CD8+ at 96hrs. P=<0.0001
for CD4+ versus CD8+ (B-D). NS= not significant, *p=<0.05 and ***p=<0.001, and
129
****P<0.0001. Unless otherwise stated, the data shown here are representative of five
independent experiments.
130
UNT
C04*T
-n..f
UNT
CD8»T
? T-
¦¦¦*
·» ·' ß*
*1
» «> «· «· «?J"kW M> W
20Gv
CD4*T
a1 m· «*
I 2OGy
j CD8*T '·*$* G
— CD62L
~20Gy
. OGv
5 · ^¿
-]
— — OGy C04 naiv*
—?- 20Gy CD-I naiv»
— —OGy CD4 memory
—;— 20Gy CDJ memory
CD4 ?»i?* COS rwtve CDi memory C06 memory
CD4 naiv· C04 memory CDS naiv» CDS memory
48 72
Time(hr)
w 3
° s
— —OGy CDS naive
—o—2OGyCDS natv·
——OGy CD8 memory
—,—20GyCD8 memory
Figure 2. Effect of irradiation on naïve (CD45RA+CD62L+) and effector memory
(CD45RA CD62L) CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
(A) Gated CD3+ CD4+ T cells from unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy
(bottom row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for CD45RA versus
CD62L. (B) Gated CD3+ CD8+ T cells from unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or
after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for CD45RA
versus CD62L. (C) The mean percentage (¿standard error) of naïve and memory CD4+
131
and CD8+ are shown at 96hrs after 0 and 20Gy irradiation. (D) Mean absolute numbers
(¿standard error) for naive and memory CD4+ T cells (top row) and naïve and memory
CD8+ T cells (bottom row) at 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (E) Mean
fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus unirradiated) (¿standard error) ofdifferent
CD4 and CD8 subsets at 96hrs. (C-E) NS= not significant, *p=<0.05, **p=<0.01, and
****P=<0.0001.
i « -s
li *
If I
Figure 3. Effect of irradiation on APC subsets.
(A) Gated HLA-DR+ cells from unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy
(bottom row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for CDl lb versus CD 14
monocytes. (B) Unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0
132
and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for Side Scatter versus Lin- total dendritic
cells. (C) Gated Lin" dendritic cells from human PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom
row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for HLA-DR versus CDl Ic
conventional dendritic cells. (D) The mean percentage (¿standard error) ofmonocytes,
total dendritic cells, and conventional dendritic cells are shown at 96hrs before and after
20Gy irradiation. (E) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for monocytes at 0, 24,
48, 72, and 96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (F) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error)
for total dendritic cells at 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (G) Mean
absolute numbers (¿standard error) for conventional dendritic cells at 0, 24, 48, 72, and
96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (H) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus
unirradiated) (¿standard error) of different APC subsets at 96hrs. (B-H) NS= not
significant, * ? =<0.05, **p=<0.01, and ****P=<0.0001.
133
96hr
UNT
CD4»T
• T
ce
20Gv JJ
CD4»T
IkBa -
Ohr
UNT
CD8*T
20Gv S '
C08»T ?
96hr
•w
Time (hr)
: OGy PARP*
D30Cy PARP+ /
•z4~o-
O 1 4
0GyCO8+Te«lls
20Gy COS+ T CtIlS
0GyCD3+PARP*
•20GyCD8+PARP*
OGyCDB+ IhBa
20GvCD8+lkbM·
Si £
8 24
Time (hr)
*C\
46 72 56
-OGy C 04+ T cells
-20GyC04+Teells
-0GyCD4+PARP+
-20GyCD4+PARP*
-OGyCDJ+ IkBa
-20GyCD4+lkt>a+
G
I
¦CD4+Te«ll5
GCD8+T cells
Figure 4. Radiation does not induce IkBa in T cells and CD8+ T cells display
greater sensitivity to radiation (greater cleaved PARP) than CD4> T cells to
radiation.
(A) Gated CD4+ cells from unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom
row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for cleaved PARP versus IkBa.
(B) Gated CD8+ cells from unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom
134
row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for cleaved PARP versus IkBa.
(C) The mean percentage (¿standard error) ofCD4+ or CD8+ PARP+ cells are shown at
96hrs after 0 and 20Gy irradiation. (D) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for
CD4, CD4 PARP+ and CD4 IkBa+ cells at 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hrs after OGy versus
20Gy. (E) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for CD8, CD8 PARP+ and CD8
DcBa+ cells at 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (F) Mean fold change
(ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus unirradiated) (¿standard error) of CD4 or CD8 PARP+
or IkBa+ cells at 96hrs. (C-F) ** (p=<0.01) and ****(p=<0.0001).
135
96hr
UNT
Monocytes I
UNT
Conv. DC
20Gy at '
Monocytes W
\m c · #O- ti*^,
< · If if
°- ,
(O
20Gv Ü "¦
Conv. DC <->
if M5 If
I
Lit
W3 M* rf*
liB.i 1KB,)
OCy
p 2OCy
OGy Monocytes
20Gy Monocyt*s
OGytkBa
2OCyIkBa
OGylkBa+PARP*
20GyIkBJWARP*
OGyPARP*
2OGvPARP*
24 48 72 96
—OCy Conv. DC
>-20Cy Conv. DC
i—OCyIkB**
-2OCyIhBa*
>— OGylkBa+PARP*
—.— 20Cy»iBa+PAHP+
-OCyPARP*
-SOCy PARP* =¦ 10
Time (hr)
I
DlkBa*PARP*
OPARP*
0 1 4 8 24 48 72 96
Figure 5. APC are more radioresistant (decreased cleaved PARP) than T cell
subsets and their radioresistance could be due to increased ???a activity.
(A) Gated PILA-DR+CDl Ib+CDH+ cells from unirradiated human PBMC (top row) or
after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for cleaved
PARP versus ???a. (B) Gated UnHLA-DR+CDl Ic+ cells from unirradiated human
136
PBMC (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 96hrs, were analyzed by flow
cytometry for cleaved PARP versus ???a. (C) The mean percentage (¿standard error) of
monocytes or conventional DC ???a+, Iicba+PARP+, OrPARP+ cells are shown at 96hrs
after 0 and 20Gy irradiation. (D) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for
monocytes, monocytes ???a+, monocytes ???a+ PARP+, and monocytes PARP+ at 0, 24,
48, 72, and 96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (E) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error)
for conventional dendritic cells, conventional dendritic cells ???a+, conventional
dendritic cells ???a+ PARP+, and conventional dendritic cells PARP+ at 0, 24, 48, 72,
and 96 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (F) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy)
versus unirradiated) (¿standard error) ofmonocytes or conventional dendritic cells that
are IkBa+, IKBa+PARP+, or PARP+ cells at 96hrs. (C-F) * (p=<0.05), **(p=<0.01), ***
(p=<0.001) and ****(p=<0.0001); F (data not displayed that are =<0.01).
137
UNT CD4+T
a »? ?? to
•
o to1" 10a IO*
TV
f§-
io" to' tn"
# # :
0 io' IO3 IO* 10S
#
io' ioa
TUNEL
C
o to' io3 id* ta*
IO» IO1 IO" IO*
/ f ? / f ?
.1
Time(hr)
¦OGy C03+
c20Gy CD8+
^0GyCO3+Bax+
¦ 20 Gv CDB* Baa*
Q0GtfCD3+TUNEL+
C 20 Gy C D8* TUNEL+
EO Gy CD8+B3X+TUNEL+
?20 Gy C08+833+ TUNiL+
1
¦OGy CD4*
G20GyCO4*
o0 Gy CD4+B3X+
• 20 Gy CD4+B3X+
D20 Gy C04+TUNEL+
EO Gy CD4+Bax+TUPi£i+
C20 Gy C04+8s)i+TUNEL+
Time (tir)
I
i I=. ¦CD4+a COS*
TUHEL+ Ban+TUNEL+
Figure 6. CD8+ T cells are more radiosesnsitive than CD4+ T cells as indicated by
greater activation of Bax and TUNEL.
(A) Gated CD4+ and CD8+ cells from unirradiated or after 20Gy human PBMC at Ohrs
(top row) or at 24hrs (bottom row), were analyzed by flow cytometry for Bax versus
TUNEL. (B) The mean percentage (¿standard error) ofCD4+ or CD8+ Bax+, TUNEL+,
138
or BaX+TUNEL+ cells are shown at 24hrs after 0 and 20Gy irradiation. All ? values are
(=<0.05) (C) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for CD4+, CD4+Bax+,
CD4+TUNEL+, CD4+ BaX+TUNEL+ cells at 0, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy.
(D) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for CD8+, CDS+BaX+, CD8+TUNEL+,
CD8+ BaX+TUNEL+ cells at 0, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (C-E)
*(p=<0.05).
139
UNT Monocytes 20Gy Monocytes UNT Conv. DC 20Gv Conv. OC
¦m·
#"
?
! ,„¦-
W
o to7 io3 m* 10s
m
0U
ïr*.-
_»»». ha*.
to to*
¿Su: #
18" tO"
9
10* tO0 0 10Í? ?* ,0" M*0
??* 10a
¦OGy
..'23Gi;
S .•" ,</ / .•"
*°/
¦OGv OC
p 20 Gy DC
7>0 Gy DC Bax*
• 20 Gy DC Bau+
UO Gy DC TÚNEL«
O20 Gy DC TÚNEL*
KO Gy DC Bax+TUNEL*
n20GvDCBa**TUNEL*
L
u £ 20
'S ?
¦OGy Monocytes
? 20 Gy Monocytes
: 0 Gy Menoeytei Ba**
ß 29 Gy Metiocyîes Gas*
tsO Gy Monocyte? TÚNEL+
L-:20 Gv Monocytes TUKEL*
©0 Gy Monocyte« Bax+TUNEL*
?20 Gy Monocytes Ba**TUNEL*
Tlme(hr)
I
TÚNEL* Bax+TUNEL+
Figure 7. Conventional Dendritic Cells are slightly more radioresistant than
Monocytes as indicated by greater activation of Bax and TUNEL.
(A) Gated HLA-DR+CDl Ib+ CD14+ and Un-HLA-DR+ CDl Ic+ cells from unirradiated
or after 20Gy human PBMC at Ohrs (top row) or at 24hrs (bottom row), were analyzed by
flow cytometry for Bax versus TUNEL. (B) The mean percentage (¿standard error) of
140
monocytes or conventional dendritic cells Bax+, TUNEL+, or BaX+TUNEL+ cells are
shown at 24hrs after 0 and 20Gy irradiation. (C) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard
error) for monocytes, monocytes Bax+, monocytes TUNEL+, and monocytes
BaX+TUNEL+ cells at 0, 1, 4, 8, and 24 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (D) Mean absolute
numbers (¿standard error) for conventional dendritic cells, conventional dendritic cells
Bax+, conventional dendritic cells TUNEL+, conventional dendritic cells BaX+TUNEL+ at
0, 1,4, 8, and 24 hrs after 0Gy versus 20Gy(D) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated
(20Gy) versus unirradiated) (¿standard error) of monocytes or conventional dendritic
cells Bax+, TUNEL+, or BaX+TUNEL+ at 24 hrs. (B-E) NS= not significant, *(p=<0.05),
** (p=<0.01), ***(p=<0.001), and ****(p=0.0001).
141
References
Ame, J. C, C. Spenlehauer, and G. de Murcia. 2004. The parp superfamily. Bioessays 26,
no. 8: 882-93.
Anderson, B. E., J. M. McNiff, C. Matte, I. Athanasiadis, W. D. Shlomchik, and M. J.
Shlomchik. 2004. Recipient cd4+ 1 cells that survive irradiation regulate chronic
graft-versus-host disease. Blood 104, no. 5: 1565-73.
Boise, L. H., A. J. Minn, P. J. Noel, C. H. June, M. A. Accavitti, T. Lindsten, and C. B.
Thompson. 1995. Cd28 costimulation can promote t cell survival by enhancing
the expression ofbcl-xl. Immunity 3, no. 1: 87-98.
Brown, J. M. and L. D. Attardi. 2005. The role ofapoptosis in cancer development and
treatment response. Nat Rev Cancer 5, no. 3: 231-7.
Darzynkiewicz, Z., G. Juan, X. Li, W. Gorczyca, T. Murakami, and F. Tráganos. 1997.
Cytometry in cell necrobiology: Analysis of apoptosis and accidental cell death
(necrosis). Cytometry 27, no. 1 : 1 -20.
Demaria, S., N. Bhardwaj, W. H. McBride, and S. C. Formenti. 2005. Combining
radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership. Int JRadiât Oncol Biol
Phys 63, no. 3: 655-66.
Domen, J., K. L. Gandy, and I. L. Weissman. 1998. Systemic overexpression ofbcl-2 in
the hematopoietic system protects transgenic mice from the consequences of
lethal irradiation. Blood 91, no. 7: 2272-82.
Edinger, M., P. Hoffmann, J. Ermann, K. Drago, C. G. Fathman, S. Straber, and R. S.
Negrin. 2003. Cd4+cd25+ regulatory t cells preserve graft-versus-tumor activity
142
while inhibiting graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. Nat
Med 9, no. 9: 1144-50.
Enari, M., H. Sakahira, H. Yokoyama, K. Okawa, A. Iwamatsu, and S. Nagata. 1998. A
caspase-activated dnase that degrades DNA during apoptosis, and its inhibitor
icad. Nature 391, no. 6662: 43-50.
Field, E. H. and S. Straber. 2001. Tolerance, mixed chimerism and protection against
graft-versus-host disease after total lymphoid irradiation. Philos Trans R Soc
LondB Biol Sci 356, no. 1409: 739-48.
Friedman, E. J. 2002. Immune modulation by ionizing radiation and its implications for
cancer immunotherapy. Curr Pharm Des 8, no. 19: 1765-80.
Fuks, Z. and S. Slavin. 1981. The use of total lymphoid irradiation (tli) as
immunosuppressive therapy for organ allotransplantation and autoimmune
diseases. Int JRadiât Oncol Biol Phys 7, no. 1: 79-82.
Hallahan, D. E., D. R. Spriggs, M. A. Beckett, D. W. Kufe, and R. R. Weichselbaum.
1989. Increased tumor necrosis factor alpha mrna after cellular exposure to
ionizing radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86, no. 24: 10104-7.
Higuchi, M., D. Zeng, J. Shizuru, J. Gworek, S. Dejbakhsh-Jones, M. Taniguchi, and S.
Straber. 2002. Immune tolerance to combined organ and bone marrow transplants
after fractionated lymphoid irradiation involves regulatory nk t cells and clonal
deletion. JImmunol 169, no. 10: 5564-70.
Hockenbery, D., G. Nunez, C. Milliman, R. D. Schreiber, and S. J. Korsmeyer. 1990.
Bcl-2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks programmed cell
death. Nature 348, no. 6299: 334-6.
143
Hong, J. H., C. S. Chiang, C. Y. Tsao, P. Y. Lin, W. H. McBride, and C. J. Wu. 1999.
Rapid induction ofcytokine gene expression in the lung after single and
fractionated doses of radiation. Int JRadiât Biol 75, no. 11: 1421-7.
Ishihara, H., K. Tsuneoka, A. B. Dimchev, and M. Shikita. 1993. Induction ofthe
expression of the interleukin-1 beta gene in mouse spleen by ionizing radiation.
Radiât Res 133, no. 3: 321-6.
Joffre, 0., T. Santularia, D. Cause, T. Al Saati, D. Hudrisier, P. Romagnoli, and J. P. van
Meerwijk. 2008. Prevention of acute and chronic allograft rejection with
cd4+cd25+foxp3+ regulatory t lymphocytes. Nat Med 14, no. 1: 88-92.
Kohrt, H. E., B. B. Turnbull, K. Heydari, J. A. Shizuru, G. G. Laport, D. B. Miklos, L. J.
Johnston, S. Arai, W. K. Weng, R. T. Hoppe, P. W. Lavori, K. G. Blume, R. S.
Negrin, S. Straber, and R. Lowsky. 2009. TIi and atg conditioning with low risk
of graft-versus-host disease retains antitumor reactions after allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation from related and unrelated donors. Blood 1 14,
no. 5: 1099-109.
Krajewski, S., S. Tanaka, S. Takayama, M. J. Schibler, W. Fenton, and J. C. Reed. 1993.
Investigation of the subcellular distribution of the bcl-2 oncoprotein: Residence in
the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic reticulum, and outer mitochondrial
membranes. Cancer Res 53, no. 19: 4701-14.
Lan, F., D. Zeng, M. Higuchi, J. P. Higgins, and S. Straber. 2003. Host conditioning with
total lymphoid irradiation and antithymocyte globulin prevents graft-versus-host
disease: The role ofcd 1 -reactive natural killer t cells. Biol Blood Marrow
Transplant 9, no. 6: 355-63.
144
Lan, F., D. Zeng, M. Higuchi, P. Huie, J. P. Higgins, and S. Straber. 2001. Predominance
of nk 1.1 +ter alpha beta+ or dx5+tcr alpha beta+ 1 cells in mice conditioned with
fractionated lymphoid irradiation protects against graft-versus-host disease:
"Natural suppressor" Cells. J Immunol 167, no. 4: 2087-96.
Luznik, L., J. E. Slansky, S. Jalla, I. Borrello, H. I. Levitsky, D. M. Pardoll, and E. J.
Fuchs. 2003. Successful therapy ofmetastatic cancer using tumor vaccines in
mixed allogeneic bone marrow chimeras. Blood 101, no. 4: 1645-52.
Maris, M. B., B. M. Sandmaier, B. E. Storer, T. Chauncey, M. J. Stuart, R. T. Maziarz, E.
Agura, A. A. Längsten, M. Pulsipher, R. Storb, and D. G. Maloney. 2004.
Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation after fludarabine and 2 gy total
body irradiation for relapsed and refractory mantle cell lymphoma. Blood 104, no.
12: 3535-42.
Mielcarek, M., P. J. Martin, W. Leisenring, M. E. Flowers, D. G. Maloney, B. M.
Sandmaier, M. B. Maris, and R. Storb. 2003. Graft-versus-host disease after
nonmyeloablative versus conventional hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Blood 102, no. 2: 756-62.
Murphy, M., M. J. Mabruk, P. Lenane, A. Liew, P. McCann, A. Buckley, P. Billet, M.
Leader, E. Kay, and G. M. Murphy. 2002. The expression ofp53, p21, bax and
induction of apoptosis in normal volunteers in response to different doses of
ultraviolet radiation. Br JDermatol 147, no. 1: 110-7.
Oltvai, Z. N., C. L. Milliman, and S. J. Korsmeyer. 1993. Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo
with a conserved homolog, bax, that accelerates programmed cell death. Cell 74,
no. 4: 609-19.
145
Paulos, C. M., C. Wrzesinski, A. Kaiser, C. S. Hinrichs, M. Chieppa, L. Cassard, D. C.
Palmer, A. Boni, P. Muranski, Z. Yu, L. Gattinoni, P. A. Antony, S. A.
Rosenberg, and N. P. Restifo. 2007. Microbial translocation augments the
function ofadoptively transferred self/tumor-specific cd8+ 1 cells via tlr4
signaling. J Clin Invest 117', no. 8: 2197-204.
Pillai, A. B., T. I. George, S. Dutt, P. Teo, and S. Strober. 2007. Host nkt cells can
prevent graft-versus-host disease and permit graft antitumor activity after bone
marrow transplantation. J Immunol 178, no. 10: 6242-51.
Ren, H., J. Shen, C. Tomiyama-Miyaji, M. Watanabe, E. Kainuma, M. Inoue, Y.
Kuwano, and T. Abo. 2006. Augmentation of innate immunity by low-dose
irradiation. Cell Immunol 244, no. 1 : 50-6.
Rieser, C, G. Bock, H. Klocker, G. Bartsch, and M. Thurnher. 1997. Prostaglandin e2
and tumor necrosis factor alpha cooperate to activate human dendritic cells:
Synergistic activation of interleukin 12 production. JExp Med 186, no. 9: 1603-8.
Seino, K., M. Harada, and M. Taniguchi. 2004. Nkt cells are relatively resistant to
apoptosis. Trends Immunol 25, no. 5: 219-21 .
Steinauer, K. K., I. Gibbs, S. Ning, J. N. French, J. Armstrong, and S. J. Knox. 2000.
Radiation induces upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2) protein in pc-3 cells.
Int JRadiât Oncol Biol Phys 48, no. 2: 325-8.
Strober, S. 1987. Total lymphoid irradiation in alloimmunity and autoimmunity. J
Pediatr 1 1 1, no. 6 Pt 2: 1051-5.
146
Tamada, K., M. Harada, K. Abe, T. Li, and K. Nomoto. 1998. Il-4-producing nkl.l+ 1
cells are resistant to glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis: Implications for the thl/th2
balance. JImmunol 161, no. 3: 1239-47.
Teitz-Tennenbaum, S., Q. Li, R. Okuyama, M. A. Davis, R. Sun, J. Whitfield, R. N.
Knibbs, L. M. Stoolman, and A. E. Chang. 2008. Mechanisms involved in
radiation enhancement of intratumoral dendritic cell therapy. J Immunother 31,
no. 4: 345-58.
Veis, D. J., C. M. Sorenson, J. R. Shutter, and S. J. Korsmeyer. 1993. Bcl-2-deficient
mice demonstrate fulminant lymphoid apoptosis, polycystic kidneys, and
hypopigmented hair. Cell 75, no. 2: 229-40.
Walker, P. R., L. Kokileva, J. LeBlanc, and M. Sikorska. 1993. Detection of the initial
stages ofDNA fragmentation in apoptosis. Biotechniques 15, no. 6: 1032-40.
Williams, G. T. 1991. Programmed cell death: Apoptosis and oncogenesis. Cell 65, no. 7:
1097-8.
Yang, J., X. Liu, K. Bhalla, C. N. Kim, A. M. Ibrado, J. Cai, T. I. Peng, D. P. Jones, and
X. Wang. 1997. Prevention ofapoptosis by bcl-2: Release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria blocked. Science 275, no. 5303: 1129-32.
Yao, Z., Y. Liu, J. Jones, and S. Straber. 2009. Differences in bcl-2 expression by t-cell
subsets alter their balance after in vivo irradiation to favor cd4+bcl-2hi nkt cells.
Eur JImmunol 39, no. 3: 763-75.
147
I
'I
¦W
"L...
S»'
s „¡
20Gy ¡S --j
COa«T , ? *:
ili ri
OC) CCM MGv <
1 1 ¡ r ·; I li 1 1
Supplemental Figure 1. Irradiation increased expression of Bax in T cell subsets
while Bcl-2 expression remained relatively constant.
(A) Gated CD3+CD4+ cells from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0
and 24hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for Side Scatter versus Bcl-2. (B) Gated
CD3+CD8+ cells from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 24hrs,
148
were analyzed by flow cytometry for Side Scatter versus Bcl-2. (C) Gated CD3+CD4+
cells from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 24hrs, were
analyzed by flow cytometry for Side Scatter versus Bax. (D) Gated CD3+CD8+ cells
from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 24hrs, were analyzed by
flow cytometry for Side Scatter versus Bax. (E) The mean percentage (¿standard error)
of CD4+ and CD8+ Bcl-2 Io and Bcl-2 hi cells at 24hrs after 0 and 20Gy irradiation. (F)
The mean percentage (¿standard error) ofCD4+ and CD8+ Bax Io and Bax hi cells at
24hrs after 0 and 20Gy irradiation. (G) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for
CD4+ or CD8+ Bcl-2 Io and hi cells at 24 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (H) Mean absolute
numbers (¿standard error) for CD4+ or CD8+Bax Io and hi cells at 24 hrs after OGy
versus 20Gy. (I) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus unirradiated)
(¿standard error) ofCD4+, CD8+ Bcl-2 Io or hi cells at 24hrs. (J) Mean fold change
(ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus unirradiated) (¿standard error) ofCD4+, CD8+ Bax Io
orhiat24hrs. (E-I) *(p=<0.05), **(p=<0.01), and ***(p=<0.001).
149
¦<w
20Gv «** ¦
Conv. DC -S
?
-------------„-, Bc|.2
??
Il
I i
"S NS
I I .7
Supplemental Figure 2. Irradiation slightly increased expression of Bax in APC cell
subsets while Bcl-2 expression remained relatively constant.
(A) Gated HLA-DR+CDl Ib+ CD14+ from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom
row) at 0 and 24hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for Side Scatter versus Bcl-2. (B)
150
Gated LmHLA-DR+ CDl Ic+ cells from unirradiated or after 20Gy human PBMC at Ohrs
(top row) or at 24hrs (bottom row), were analyzed by flow cytometry for Side Scatter
versus Bcl-2. (C) Gated HLA-DR+CDl Ib+ CD14+ from unirradiated (top row) or after
20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 24hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for Side Scatter
versus Bax. (D) Gated LmHLA-DR+ CDl Ic+ cells from unirradiated or after 20Gy
human PBMC at Ohrs (top row) or at 24hrs (bottom row), were analyzed by flow
cytometry for Side Scatter versus Bax. (E) The mean percentage (¿standard error) of
monocytes and conventional dendritic cells Bcl-2 Io and Bcl-2 hi cells at 24 hrs after 0
and 20Gy irradiation. (F) The mean percentage (¿standard error) ofmonocytes and
conventional dendritic cells Bax Io and Bax hi cells at 24 hrs after 0 and 20Gy irradiation.
(G) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for monocytes or conventional dendritic
cells Bcl-2 Io and hi cells at 24 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (H) Mean absolute numbers
(¿standard error) for monocytes or conventional dendritic cells Bax Io and hi cells at 24
hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (I) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus
unirradiated) (¿standard error) of monocytes or conventional dendritic cells Bcl-2 Io or hi
at 24 hrs. (J) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus unirradiated)
(¿standard error) ofmonocytes or conventional dendritic cells Bax Io or hi at 24 hrs.
NS=not significant, *(p=<0.05), ** (p=<0.01), ***(p=<0.001), and ****(p=<0.0001).
151
A Ohr 24hr B Ohr 24hr
UNT
UNT 1 CD8*TCD4+T
1
N(N
2QGv 20Gv
mCD4+T CD8*T >i-1
L·
?3? Bax
too
eo
¦OGy Bcl-2*
MGvetl-2*
60 COGv Ba
CZOGv Bax*
40 ¦OGa Bel-2* and Box*
P CiZOGv BtI-Z* and B
20 NS
ri
CDS* T co:isCEM* T
1S
to
rn
to
IS
20
23
Supplemental Figure 3. Greater Bax+ CD8+ T cells (than CD4+ T cells) compared
to T cell Bax+Bcl-2+ expression could explain greater radiosensitivity of CD8+ T
cells.
(A) Gated CD3+CD4+ cells from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0
and 24hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for Bcl-2 versus Bax. (B) Gated
CD3+CD8+ cells from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy (bottom row) at 0 and 24hrs,
were analyzed by flow cytometry for Bcl-2 versus Bax. (C) The mean percentage
(±standard error) ofCD4+ and CD8+ Bcl-2+, Bax+, or Bcl-2+Bax+ cells at 24 hrs after OGy
152
versus 20Gy. (D) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for CD4+ and CD8+ Bcl-2+,
Bax+, or Bcl-2+Bax+ cells at 24 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (E) Mean fold change (ratio
of irradiated (20Gy) versus unirradiated) (¿standard error) of CD4+ or CD8+ Bax+, or
Bax+Bcl-2+ cells at 24 hrs. (C-E) **(p=<0.01), ***(p=<0.001), and ****(p=<0.0001);
(data displayed are =<0.01).
153
UNT
Monocytes
:L.
20Gy
Monocytes
UNT
Conv. OC
.F*.
'L·.-
20Gy
Conv. DC L«fe.
J
¦QGy Et!-2*
-20Gy Bsl-2*
nOGy But*
c20Gy B ii*
¦OGv Bt I -2* and Bm*
¦•ir· D20G» Bcl-2* «id Bjx*
h
J
¦ OGï MonotvMì
p 2OGy Monocvtvt
?»· ?« I -2+ Jnd Bat
i I ¦OGï Ceiw. OC? 20Gy Com·. OC
Ba** Bcl-2« and Bai»
NS
Supplemental Figure 4. Greater Bax+ Monocyte expression (than Conventional
Dendritic Cells) compared to APC BaX+BcM+ expression after irradiation could
explain greater radiosensitivity of Monocytes.
(A) Gated HLA-DR+CDl Ib+ CD14+ from unirradiated (top row) or after 20Gy human
PBMC (bottom row) at 0 and 24 hrs, were analyzed by flow cytometry for Bcl-2 versus
Bax. (B) Gated LUiHLA-DR+ CDl Ic+ cells from unirradiated or after 20Gy human
PBMC at Ohrs (top row) or at 24hrs (bottom row), were analyzed by flow cytometry for
154
Bcl-2 versus Bax. (C) The mean percentage (¿standard error) of monocytes and
conventional dendritic cells Bcl-2+, Bax+, or Bcl-2+Bax+ cells at 24 hrs after OGy versus
20Gy. (D) Mean absolute numbers (¿standard error) for monocytes Bcl-2+, Bax+, or
BcI-I+BaK+ cells at 24 hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (E) Mean absolute numbers
(¿standard error) for conventional dendritic cells Bcl-2+, Bax+, or BcW+BaX+ cells at 24
hrs after OGy versus 20Gy. (F) Mean fold change (ratio of irradiated (20Gy) versus
unirradiated) (¿standard error) ofmonocytes or conventional dendritic cells Bcl-2+, Bax+,
or Bax+Bcl-2+ at 24hrs. (C-F) NS=not significant, *(p=<0.05), **(p=<0.01), and
****(p=<0.0001).
155
CHAPTER 4
SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Summary
By characterizing the relevant functional radiation-induced intracellular signaling
changes in APC and identifying factors associated with the relative radioresistance of
certain APC subsets, this thesis supports the theory that radiation directly affects immune
cells in a functionally relevant manner. These results also show that enhanced APC
function/responsivenes and radioresistance are interrelated.
Because radioresistant APC subsets express lower levels of Bax (compared to T
cells), radiation induces lower levels of cleaved PARP and lower rates of apoptosis in
radioresistant APC subsets. The table below represents a summary of radiation's effects
on the mitochondrial-caspase mediated apoptotic pathway and the increase in TUNEL
(readout of apoptosis).
156
CI)X+ CI M+
T cell
?f
Bax t T
Bcl-2
Cleaved
PARP
t
TUNEL T
Table 1. Radiation induced changes in mitochondrial mediated caspase apoptotic
pathway in immune cell subsets.
It is conceivable that the NFkB pathway should also be activated in these cells
since NFkB is necessary for immune cell survival, promotes transcription of anti-
apoptotic genes (Ghosh and Karin 2002), and is activated by radiation in tumor cells
(Magne et al. 2006). The studies presented here did not examine the role of NEMO in
the increase in Bax+ APC after radiation . IfBaX+ APC increase after radiation while
NEMO activation is inhibited, this would suggest that radiation-induced activation of Bax
is NFkB pathway dependent.
In addition to not knowing which and how APC survive, it was not known
whether NFkB is activated by radiation in APC or if radiation-induced activation ofthe
NFkB pathway is necessary and/or sufficient for APC responsiveness. The studies in
chapter 2, demonstrate that radiation does induce activation ofthe NFkB pathway in
human monocytic cell line and human APC from PBMC, and these studies show that
157
ATM radiation-induced phosphorylation ofNEMO, an upstream target of the pathway,
was necessary and sufficient for enhanced APC responsiveness (as indicated by increased
T cell proliferation, co-stimulatory molecule expression, and cytokine production).
If radiation-induced activation of Bax in APC also requires ATM mediated activation of
the NFkB pathway this would further link the two pathways. Overall, APC that survive
radiation, due to low Bax which could result from the NFkB pathway inhibiting an
increase in Bax levels, would have enhanced function after radiation due to NFkB
pathway activation and inhibiting this pathway would decrease APC survival in addition
to inhibiting APC function.
158
ROS
Bcl-2
Cytochrome €
/
Caspase Cascade
\O NFkB?
PARP
IoATM NEMO
Figure J. Overview ofradiation-induced signaling changes in APC.
In this model, radiation results in DNA damage (direct and indirect via ROS production)
that activates the NFkB pathway via phosphorylation ofNEMO which is ATM mediated,
and is not due to direct activation ofNFkB by ROS. This activation ofNFkB leads to
transcription of genes that promote maturation and activation ofAPC, which leads to
enhanced responsiveness ofAPC after radiation, as well as, anti-apoptotic proteins that
block caspase function or inhibit cytochrome c release (Chen et al. 2002; Magne et al.
2006). A direct interaction between activation ofNFkB and inhibition or activation of
pro-apoptotic factors such as Bax is not known and therefore no direct link is shown
between NFkB and Bax in the model. ROS produced by radiation also activates the
159
mitochondrial caspase mediated pathway in which the relationship between pro-apoptotic
and anti-apoptotic factors determines the susceptibility to apoptosis. Ifmore pro-
apoptotic factors are present, mitochondria release Cytochrome c, which activates the
caspases, and finally cleaved PARP that leads to apoptosis. In this case, varying Bax
expression among APC subsets correlated with the differential susceptibility to apoptosis
(as indicated by PARP expression). Furthermore, characterizing radiation-induced
changes in APC and the relative radioresistance of the different subsets (monocytes and
dendritic cells) along with T cell subsets (CD4 and CD8 naive and memory) was
important because of the clinical relevance of understanding how radiation modulates the
immune system. Potential examples of this relevance are demonstrated in the following
scenarios:
1) Radioresistant APC are present within the early post-transplant period after HSCT. If
these cells are surviving, their function after radiation will be enhanced and thereby, can
increase GVT effects (i.e. enhanced host dendritic cell ratio after radiation could lead
increase priming by activated host dendritic cells ofcytotoxic T lymphocytes and
increase their cytolytic activity). On the other hand, the survival and activation ofhost
APC after HSCT may be deleterious and promote acute GVHD.
2) Radiation also selectively depletes T cell subsets with memory T cells being the most
radioresistant (chapter 3). The depletion ofhost T cells enhances engraftment and reduces
solid organ rejection. In addition, there would be residual resistant host memory T cells
that could increase the risk of allograft transplant rejection in hosts. The effects of
160
radiation on APC and T cell subsets along with the associated predicated clinical
outcomes are summarized in table 1 below.
Radiation-induced A's GVT GVHD Solid Organ
Allograft
Tolerance
Host APC activation t T i
ÏHost DCMonocytes
Host CD4 T cell
depletion
Host residual memory
T cells
t t
t
i
Table 2. Radiation induced PMBC subset changes andpredicted clinical outcomes.
Since there is no way to know whether or not patients will have improved GVT effects or
suffer from GHVD, characterizing radiation induced changes in APC has provided
potentially useful markers (NFkB pathway molecules, Bax and other pro-apoptotic
proteins) that could be used to optimize radiation treatment protocols for anti-tumor
therapies as well preparatory radiation regimens for successful HSCT (i.e. no GVHD).
161
Future Research
The findings reported here demonstrate the importance of radiation as an
independent immune modulatory agent, with the potential to suppress or enhance the
immune response, and point to several promising directions for future research. Such
studies are timely, since the use of radiation as a component oftumor vaccine strategies is
an area of active investigation. Future studies should seek to elucidate methods by which
NEMO, ???a and NFkB activation after radiation may directly enhance tumor immunity.
Described below are examples of studies that could further elucidate the role of radiation
as a potentiator of tumor immunity.
1: Isolate APC from mouse tumor models of common human cancers (i.e. breast,
lung, or colon) after localized radiation treatment to assess activation of NFkB and
its upstream targets.
Rationale: Results presented within this thesis demonstrate that NFkB pathway
activation after radiation in human APC is necessary for enhanced APC
responsiveness/function. Confirmation ofNFkB pathway activation in APC from mouse
model tumors would provide in vivo validation of results to date and facilitate further
exploration ofhow this activation can be used to directly enhance tumor immunity.
Experimental Design and Methods: For these experiments, syngeneic or spontaneous
tumor models should be used. Tumors will be harvested at d 0, 2, 5, 10 after localized
162
radiation, digested to obtain single-cell suspensions and used for flow-cytometric analysis
ofAPC and T cell subsets for NEMO, IkBoc, and NFkB activation.
Expected Results: It is expected that these experiments will demonstrate radiation-
induced phosphorylation ofNEMO, ???a, and NFkB in APC, but not T cells isolated
from tumors.
2: To correlate radiation-induced changes in specific aim 1 with function in tumor
models.
Rationale: Results from this thesis have demonstrated that radiation-induced NFkB
pathway activation enhances APC responsiveness. In vivo validation is needed to
confirm activation ofthis pathway in correlating has useful correlates to clinical
outcomes.
Experimental Design and Methods: Normal mice with OVA expression tumors would be
locally irradiated and injected with OT 1 specific CD8+ T cells that are fluorescently
labeled with carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE). T cells would be
isolated from the tumors and analyzed by flow cytometry for cell proliferation (Lugade et
al. 2008; Sancho et al. 2008). In addition, OT 1 specific CD8+ T cells would be
cocultured with APC, both from the unirradiated and irradiated OVA expressing tumors
ofdifferent mice to assess cytokine production in vitro. As T cell proliferation and
cytokine production are indicative ofAPC responsiveness, correlates could then be drawn
between the extent to which NEMO, ???a, or NFkB is phosphorylated after radiation
and the probable enhanced responsiveness ofAPC from irradiated tumors in these mice.
163
Expected Results: It is expected that radiation will enhance tumor responsiveness as a
result ofenhanced APC responsiveness after radiation. However, responsiveness may
vary with cancer type.
In vivo experiments introduce complexities not seen in vitro. The major
difference is that the effect of radiation on the tumor cells could be influenced by the
tumor microenivornment in which they are abnormal interactions between tumor and host
cells and is often characterized by hypoxia, nutrient deprivation, acidosis, and aberrant
stroma (Mueller and Fusenig, Nature Reviews Cancer 4, 839-849, 2004; Strausberg,
tumor microenviroments, the immune system, and cancer survival, 2005). In a in vivo
system, immune cells within the microenvironment can receive signals (i.e. release and
activation ofchemokines and leukocyte adhesion molecules by radiation) that can result
in homing ofAPC and T cells to the tumor site to promote an anti-tumor response and
immune cells in the tumor environment can be dysfunctional which could effect how
immune cells respond to tumor antigens. In addition, T cells and APC experience less
cell-cell contact among themselves in vivo than in vitro which could affect the functional
results obtained from studies on T and APC interactions. Also, APCs are often
expanded in vitro for functional experiments and increasing the numbers of APC could
result in enhanced functional outcomes (ex: APC responsiveness after radiation) that may
not been seen in vivo. Therefore, the complexities of an in vivo tumor model system
must be taken into account when interpreting results of radiation-induced activation of
signaling pathways and subsequent functional changes.
The clinical applicability of this research is vital as every day in the United States
an estimated 6,000 people need bone marrow transplants for hereditary and malignant
164
diseases. Many of these patients will be treated using preparatory regimens that include
radiation. Therefore, there is a need to better understand how radiation affects immune
cell subsets and the significance of relevant changes that occur in order to optimize these
treatment regimens. Thousands of new cases of hematopoetic malignancies such as non-
Hodgkins lymphoma and leukemia are diagnosed every day. As shown in Chapter 2, the
NFkB pathway is vital for APC responsiveness after radiation. Therefore, NFkB
activation or activation of an upstream target could be used as a systemic biomarker in
patients who have undergone radiation therapy for cancer treatment in preparation of
bone marrow transplantation or HSCT. Future experiments should examine the
following:
3A: Utilization of mouse GVHD models for correlative studies and functional
studies in vivo.
Rationale: APC can increase the risk for GVHD as a result of their ability to present host
antigen to donor T cells, and this ability depends on APC responsiveness. Since NFkB
determines APC responsiveness, correlation between NFkB pathway activation and
GVHD would provide compelling evidence to study inhibition of NEMO in mouse
transplantation models, and possibly in the future, in human patients.
Experimental Design: For correlative studies, the level of NFkB pathway activation in
mouse models of GVHD would be determined and compared to levels in mice without
GVHD. Higher levels of NEMO, ???a, or NFkB activation in GHVD mouse models
would indicate that future studies should examine inhibition of this pathway (i.e. by NBD
165
peptide) in vivo. The NBD peptide would be administered systemically to mice
throughout the radiation preparatory regimen for HSCT transplantation and immediately
after transplantation to determine if direct NEMO inhibition reduces the risk for GVHD
as compared to control mice.
3B: Correlate levels of NFkB pathway activation in blood samples from patients
with or without GVHD that have undergone preparatory allogeneic TBI/TLI
radiation regimens for transplantation.
Rationale: APC responsiveness is necessary in processes such as engraftment of donor
marrow/cells and chimerism. Correlating NFkB pathway activity to patient markers of
successful transplantation could be useful in optimizing preparatory regimens for
treatment. Simultaneous analysis of NFkB pathway proteins and other intracellular
proteins that may be activated by radiation and are involved in the regulation and
development of the immune system could be studied using multiplex cytometric arrays
with fluorescent nanoparticles that allow for measurement of many different analytes in a
few microliters of sample.
Experimental Design: Patient blood samples obtained before and after the preparatory
regimens using radiation for BMT or HSCT would be assessed for NFkB pathway
activation and levels of activation would be correlated to engraftment of donor cells,
chimerism and the extent of GVHD.
166
3C: Correlate levels of NFkB pathway activation in blood samples from patients
with GVT versus tumor recurrence and/or tumor persistence that will undergo
preparatory allogeneic TBI/TLI radiation regimens for transplantation.
Rationale: APC responsiveness is necessary for initiation and enhancement of GVT
responses after radiation. Correlating NFkB pathway activity to patient outcomes could
be useful for optimizing the use of radiation in promoting anti-tumor responses.
Experimental Design: Patient blood samples obtained before and after the preparatory
regimens using radiation for BMT or HSCT would be assessed for NFkB pathway
activation and levels of activation would be correlated to GVT rates. This information
could then be used to design protocols the improve GVT by NFkB pathway modification
in specific patients.
Similar studies as presented in specific aim 3 could also be used to examine the
use ofNFkB as a systemic biomarker ofAPC responsiveness in clinical trials where
radiation is combined with immunotherapies to enhance anti-tumor responses.
It would also be important to further study the significance ofthe relative
radioresistance ofAPC compared to T cell subsets as residual APC are likely to have an
important impact on immune function and thereby clinical outcomes. Though most T
cells are extremely radiosensitive, previous studies by others have demonstrated that
there are also more radioresistant T cells such as CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells that will
also have an impact on immune function as well (Joffre et al. 2008). Thus, additional
studies are warranted for mechanisms of cell survival after radiation in human T
167
regulatory cells. Similar studies should be performed with Natural Killer T cells, as they
have been shown to be radioresistant and to expand after preparatory radiation regimen
for HSCT in humans and could be affecting immune function after radiation (Lowsky et
al. 2005). Irradiated host APC are present within the early post-transplant period and
could increase the risk of allograft transplant rejection in hosts by presenting donor
alloantigens to residual memory T cells in the host. On the other hand, the
radioresistance of APC could benefit graft versus tumor effects.
The results presented in chapter 3 have demonstrated that varying expression of
Bax contributes to radiation-induced sensitivity of T cells and resistance of APC subsets.
Simultaneous analysis ofBax, Bcl-2, other anti and pro-apoptotic proteins like BcI-XL,
and p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA)(Nakano and Vousden 2001), along
with readouts of apoptotic death and mitotic catastrophe induced by radiation could be
correlated to GVT rates as above.
Overall, the work presented in this thesis has laid a foundation for continued
exploration ofhow radiation enhances the immune response as well as how to approach
the characterization of other intracellular signaling markers of APC responsiveness that
can potentially be used as clinical correlates for outcomes of radiation therapy.
168
CHAPTER 5
REFERENCES
Abdulkarim, B., S. Sabri, E. Deutsch, S. Vaganay, E. Marangoni, W. Vainchenker, P.
Bongrand, P. Busson, and J. Bourhis. 2000. Radiation-induced expression of
functional fas ligand in ebv-positive human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. Int J
Cancer 86, no. 2: 229-37.
Ahn, K. S. and B. B. Aggarwal. 2005. Transcription factor nf-kappab: A sensor for
smoke and stress signals. Ann N YAcad Sci 1056: 218-33.
Albanese, J. and N. Dainiak. 2000. Ionizing radiation alters fas antigen ligand at the cell
surface and on exfoliated plasma membrane-derived vesicles: Implications for
apoptosis and intercellular signaling. Radiât Res 153, no. 1: 49-61.
Ame, J. C, C. Spenlehauer, and G. de Murcia. 2004. The parp superfamily. Bioessays 26,
no. 8: 882-93.
Anderson, B. E., J. M. McNiff, C. Matte, I. Athanasiadis, W. D. Shlomchik, and M. J.
Shlomchik. 2004. Recipient cd4+ 1 cells that survive irradiation regulate chronic
graft-versus-host disease. Blood 104, no. 5: 1565-73.
Antonia, S., J. J. Mule, and J. S. Weber. 2004. Current developments of immunotherapy
in the clinic. Curr Opin Immunol 16, no. 2: 130-6.
Baldwin, A. S., Jr. 1996. The nf-kappa b and i kappa b proteins: New discoveries and
insights. Annu Rev Immunol 14: 649-83.
169
Banchereau, J., F. Briere, C. Caux, J. Davoust, S. Lebecque, Y. J. Liu, B. Pulendran, and
K. Palucka. 2000. Immunobiology of dendritic cells. Annu Rev Immunol 18: 767-
811.
Belka, C, P. Marini, W. Budach, K. Schulze-Osthoff, F. Lang, E. Gulbins, and M.
Bamberg. 1998. Radiation-induced apoptosis in human lymphocytes and
lymphoma cells critically relies on the up-regulation of cd95/fas/apo-l ligand.
Radiât Res 149, no. 6: 588-95.
Bellas, R. E., J. S. Lee, and G. E. Sonenshein. 1995. Expression ofa constitutive nf-
kappa b-like activity is essential for proliferation of cultured bovine vascular
smooth muscle cells. J Clin Invest 96, no. 5: 2521-7.
Bentires-Alj, M., E. Dejardin, P. Viatour, C. Van Lint, B. Froesch, J. C. Reed, M. P.
Merville, and V. Bours. 2001 . Inhibition ofthe nf-kappa b transcription factor
increases bax expression in cancer cell lines. Oncogene 20, no. 22: 2805-13.
Boise, L. H., A. J. Minn, P. J. Noel, C. H. June, M. A. Accavitti, T. Lindsten, and C. B.
Thompson. 1995. Cd28 costimulation can promote t cell survival by enhancing
the expression ofbcl-xl. Immunity 3, no. 1: 87-98.
Bottero, V., V. Busuttil, A. Loubat, N. Magne, J. L. Fischel, G. Milano, and J. F. Peyron.
2001 . Activation ofnuclear factor kappab through the ikk complex by the
topoisomerase poisons sn38 and doxorubicin: A brake to apoptosis in hela human
carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 61, no. 21: 7785-91.
Brightbill, H. D., D. H. Libraty, S. R. Krutzik, R. B. Yang, J. T. Belisle, J. R. Bleharski,
M. Maitland, M. V. Norgard, S. E. Plevy, S. T. Smale, P. J. Brennan, B. R.
Bloom, P. J. Godowski, and R. L. Modlin. 1999. Host defense mechanisms
170
triggered by microbial lipoproteins through toll-like receptors. Science 285, no.
5428: 732-6.
Brody, J. D., M. J. Goldstein, D. K. Czerwinski, and R. Levy. 2009.
Immunotransplantation preferentially expands t-effector cells over t-regulatory
cells and cures large lymphoma tumors. Blood 1 13, no. 1 : 85-94.
Brown, J. M. and L. D. Attardi. 2005. The role of apoptosis in cancer development and
treatment response. Nat Rev Cancer 5, no. 3: 231-7.
Buggins, A. G., N. Lea, J. Gaken, D. Darling, F. Farzaneh, G. J. Mufti, and W. J. Hirst.
1999. Effect ofcostimulation and the microenvironment on antigen presentation
by leukemic cells. Blood 94, no. 10: 3479-90.
Burns, T. F., E. J. Bernhard, and W. S. El-Deiry. 2001. Tissue specific expression ofp53
target genes suggests a key role for killer/dr5 in p53-dependent apoptosis in vivo.
Oncogene 20, no. 34: 4601-12.
Cameron, R. B., P. J. Spiess, and S. A. Rosenberg. 1990. Synergistic antitumor activity of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, interleukin 2, and local tumor irradiation. Studies
on the mechanism of action. JExp Med 171, no. 1: 249-63.
Chakravarty, P. K., A. Alfieri, E. K. Thomas, V. Beri, K. E. Tanaka, B. Vikram, and C.
Guha. 1999. Flt3-ligand administration after radiation therapy prolongs survival
in a murine model ofmetastatic lung cancer. Cancer Res 59, no. 24: 6028-32.
Chen, X., B. Shen, L. Xia, A. Khaletzkiy, D. Chu, J. Y. Wong, and J. J. Li. 2002.
Activation ofnuclear factor kappab in radioresistance oftp53-inactive human
keratinocytes. Cancer Res 62, no. 4: 1213-21.
171
Chen, Y. R., C. F. Meyer, and T. H. Tan. 1996. Persistent activation of c-jun n-terminal
kinase 1 Qnkl) in gamma radiation-induced apoptosis. JBiol Chem 271, no. 2:
631-4.
Chen, Y. R., X. Wang, D. Templeton, R. J. Davis, and T. H. Tan. 1996. The role of c-jun
?-terminal kinase (jnk) in apoptosis induced by ultraviolet c and gamma radiation.
Duration ofjnk activation may determine cell death and proliferation. JBiol
Chem 271, no. 50:31929-36.
Chen, Y., J. Zhang, S. A. Moore, Z. K. Bailas, J. P. Portanova, A. M. Krieg, and D. J.
Berg. 2001. Cpg DNA induces cyclooxygenase-2 expression and prostaglandin
production, bit Immunol 13, no. 8: 1013-20.
Chiang, C. S., J. H. Hong, Y. C. Wu, W. H. McBride, and G. J. Dougherty. 2000.
Combining radiation therapy with interleukin-3 gene immunotherapy. Cancer
Gene Ther 7, no. 8: 1172-8.
Chiang, C. S., R. G. Syljuasen, J. H. Hong, A. Wallis, G. J. Dougherty, and W. H.
McBride. 1997. Effects of il-3 gene expression on tumor response to irradiation in
vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res 57, no. 18: 3899-903.
Clark, G. J., N. Angel, M. Kato, J. A. Lopez, K. MacDonald, S. Vuckovic, and D. N.
Hart. 2000. The role of dendritic cells in the innate immune system. Microbes
Infect 2, no. 3: 257'-72.
Cock, J. G., A. D. Tepper, E. de Vries, W. J. van Blitterswijk, and J. Borst. 1998. Cd95
(fas/apo-1) induces ceramide formation and apoptosis in the absence of a
functional acid sphingomyelinase. JBiol Chem 273, no. 13: 7560-5.
172
Cremesti, ?., F. Paris, H. Grassme, N. Holler, J. Tschopp, Z. Fuks, E. Gulbins, and R.
Kolesnick. 2001. Ceramide enables fas to cap and kill. JBiol Chem 276, no. 26:
23954-61.
D'Amico, A. and L. Wu. 2003. The early progenitors ofmouse dendritic cells and
plasmacytoid predendritic cells are within the bone marrow hemopoietic
precursors expressing flt3. JExp Med 198, no. 2: 293-303.
Dale, D. C, L. Boxer, and W. C. Liles. 2008. The phagocytes: Neutrophils and
monocytes. Blood 112, no. 4: 935-45.
Darzynkiewicz, Z., G. Juan, X. Li, W. Gorczyca, T. Murakami, and F. Tráganos. 1997.
Cytometry in cell neurobiology: Analysis of apoptosis and accidental cell death
(necrosis). Cytometry 27', no. 1: 1-20.
Delamarre, L., H. Holcombe, and I. Mellman. 2003. Presentation of exogenous antigens
on major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i and mhc class ii molecules is
differentially regulated during dendritic cell maturation. JExp Med 198, no. 1 :
111-22.
Delves, P. J. and I. M. Roitt. 2000. The immune system. First of two parts. NEngl JMed
343, no. 1:37-49.. 2000. The immune system. Second of two parts. N Engl JMed 343, no. 2:
108-17.
Demaria, S., N. Bhardwaj, W. H. McBride, and S. C. Formenti. 2005. Combining
radiotherapy and immunotherapy: A revived partnership. Int JRadiât Oncol Biol
Phys 63, no. 3: 655-66.
173
Demaria, S. and S. C. Forment!. 2007. Sensors of ionizing radiation effects on the
immunological microenvironment of cancer. Int JRadiât Biol 83, no. 1 1-12: 819-
25.
Demaria, S., N. Kawashima, A. M. Yang, M. L. Deviti, J. S. Babb, J. P. Allison, and S.
C. Formenti. 2005. Immune-mediated inhibition ofmetastases after treatment
with local radiation and ctla-4 blockade in a mouse model ofbreast cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 1 1, no. 2 Pt 1: 728-34.
Deveraux, Q. L. and J. C. Reed. 1999. lap family proteins-suppressors ofapoptosis.
Genes Dev 13, no. 3: 239-52.
Didelot, C, M. Barberi-Heyob, A. Bianchi, P. Becuwe, J. F. Mirjolet, M. Dauca, and J.
L. Merlin. 2001. Constitutive nf-kappab activity influences basal apoptosis and
radiosensitivity of head-and-neck carcinoma cell lines. Int JRadiât Oncol Biol
Phys 51, no. 5: 1354-60.
Domen, J., K. L. Gandy, and I. L. Weissman. 1998. Systemic overexpression ofbcl-2 in
the hematopoietic system protects transgenic mice from the consequences of
lethal irradiation. Blood 91, no. 7: 2272-82.
Eder, M., G. Geissler, and A. Ganser. 1997. 11-3 in the clinic. Stem Cells 15, no. 5: 327-
33.
Edinger, M., P. Hoffmann, J. Ermann, K. Drago, C. G. Fathman, S. Straber, and R. S.
Negrin. 2003. Cd4+cd25+ regulatory t cells preserve graft-versus-tumor activity
while inhibiting graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. Nat
Med 9, no. 9: 1144-50.
174
Enari, M., H. Sakahira, H. Yokoyama, K. Okawa, A. Iwamatsu, and S. Nagata. 1998. A
caspase-activated dnase that degrades DNA during apoptosis, and its inhibitor
icad. Nature 391, no. 6662: 43-50.
Feng, H., Y. Zeng, L. Whitesell, and E. Katsanis. 2001. Stressed apoptotic tumor cells
express heat shock proteins and elicit tumor-specific immunity. Blood 97, no. 1 1 :
3505-12.
Field, E. H. and S. Straber. 2001. Tolerance, mixed chimerism and protection against
graft-versus-host disease after total lymphoid irradiation. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 356, no. 1409: 739-48.
Fonteneau, J. F., M. Larsson, A. S. Beignon, K. McKenna, I. Dasilva, A. Amara, Y. J.
Liu, J. D. Lifson, D. R. Liftman, and N. Bhardwaj. 2004. Human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 activates plasmacytoid dendritic cells and
concomitantly induces the bystander maturation ofmyeloid dendritic cells. J Virol
78, no. 10: 5223-32.
Fonteneau, J. F., M. Larsson, and N. Bhardwaj. 2002. Interactions between dead cells and
dendritic cells in the induction ofantiviral ctl responses. Curr Opin Immunol 14,
no. 4: 471-7.
Friedman, E. J. 2002. Immune modulation by ionizing radiation and its implications for
cancer immunotherapy. Curr Pharm Des 8, no. 19: 1765-80.
Fuks, Z. and S. Slavin. 1981. The use of total lymphoid irradiation (tli) as
immunosuppressive therapy for organ allotransplantation and autoimmune
diseases. Int JRadiât Oncol Biol Phys 7, no. 1 : 79-82.
175
Gallucci, S. and P. Matzinger. 2001. Danger signals: Sos to the immune system. Curr
Opin Immunol 13, no. 1: 114-9.
Ganss, R., E. Ryschich, E. Klar, B. Arnold, and G. J. Hammerling. 2002. Combination of
t-cell therapy and trigger of inflammation induces remodeling ofthe vasculature
and tumor eradication. Cancer Res 62, no. 5: 1462-70.
Ghosh, S. and M. Karin. 2002. Missing pieces in the nf-kappab puzzle. Cell 109 Suppl:
S81-96.
Guan, B., P. Yue, G. L. Clayman, and S. Y. Sun. 2001. Evidence that the death receptor
dr4 is a DNA damage-inducible, p53-regulated gene. J Cell Physiol 188, no. 1:
98-105.
Guermonprez, P., L. Saveanu, M. Kleijmeer, J. Davoust, P. Van Endert, and S.
Amigorena. 2003. Er-phagosome fusion defines an mhc class i cross-presentation
compartment in dendritic cells. Nature 425, no. 6956: 397-402.
Guermonprez, P., J. Valladeau, L. Zitvogel, C. Thery, and S. Amigorena. 2002. Antigen
presentation and t cell stimulation by dendritic cells. Annu Rev Immunol 20: 621-
67.
Gulley, J. L., P. M. Arlen, A. Bastian, S. Morin, J. Marte, P. Beetham, K. Y. Tsang, J.
Yokokawa, J. W. Hodge, C. Menard, K. Camphausen, C. N. Coleman, F.
Sullivan, S. M. Steinberg, J. Schlom, and W. Dahut. 2005. Combining a
recombinant cancer vaccine with standard definitive radiotherapy in patients with
localized prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1 1, no. 9: 3353-62.
Gulley, J. L., R. A. Madan, and P. M. Arlen. 2007. Enhancing efficacy of therapeutic
vaccinations by combination with other modalities. Vaccine 25 Suppl 2: B89-96.
176
Hallahan, D. E., D. R. Spriggs, M. A. Beckett, D. W. Kufe, and R. R. Weichselbaum.
1989. Increased tumor necrosis factor alpha mrna after cellular exposure to
ionizing radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86, no. 24: 10104-7.
Harris, P. and P. Ralph. 1985. Human leukemic models ofmyelomonocytic development:
A review ofthe hl-60 and u937 cell lines. JLeukoc Biol 37, no. 4: 407-22.
Hartgers, F. C, C. G. Figdor, and G. J. Adema. 2000. Towards a molecular
understanding ofdendritic cell immunobiology. Immunol Today 21, no. 11: 542-
5.
Hayden, M. S., A. P. West, and S. Ghosh. 2006. Nf-kappab and the immune response.
Oncogene 25, no. 51: 6758-80.
Herr, I., D. Wilhelm, T. Bohler, P. Angel, and K. M. Debatin. 1997. Activation of cd95
(apo-1/fas) signaling by ceramide mediates cancer therapy-induced apoptosis.
EMBO J 16, no. 20: 6200-8.
Higuchi, M., D. Zeng, J. Shizuru, J. Gworek, S. Dejbakhsh-Jones, M. Taniguchi, and S.
Straber. 2002. Immune tolerance to combined organ and bone marrow transplants
after fractionated lymphoid irradiation involves regulatory nk t cells and clonal
deletion. JImmunol 169, no. 10: 5564-70.
Ho, E., G. Chen, and T. M. Bray. 1999. Supplementation of?-acetylcysteine inhibits
nfkappab activation and protects against alloxan-induced diabetes in cd-1 mice.
FASEBJU, no. 13: 1845-54.
Hockenbery, D., G. Nunez, C. Milliman, R. D. Schreiber, and S. J. Korsmeyer. 1990.
Bcl-2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks programmed cell
death. Nature 348, no. 6299: 334-6.
177
Hong, J. H., C. S. Chiang, C. Y. Tsao, P. Y. Lin, W. H. McBride, and C. J. Wu. 1999.
Rapid induction of cytokine gene expression in the lung after single and
fractionated doses of radiation. Int JRadiât Biol 75, no. 11: 1421-7.
Hoppe, R. T. 1987. The non-hodgkin's lymphomas: Pathology, staging, treatment. Curr
Probi Cancer 1 1, no. 6: 363-447.
Ishihara, H., K. Tsuneoka, A. B. Dimchev, and M. Shikita. 1993. Induction ofthe
expression ofthe interleukin-1 beta gene in mouse spleen by ionizing radiation.
Radiât Res 133, no. 3: 321-6.
Iwasaki, A. and R. Medzhitov. 2004. Toll-like receptor control of the adaptive immune
responses. Nat Immunol 5, no. 10: 987-95.
Joffre, O., T. Santolaria, D. Calise, T. Al Saati, D. Hudrisier, P. Romagnoli, and J. P. van
Meerwijk. 2008. Prevention of acute and chronic allograft rejection with
cd4+cd25+foxp3+ regulatory t lymphocytes. Nat Med 14, no. 1: 88-92.
Jones, D. T., K. Ganeshaguru, A. E. Virchis, N. I. Folarin, M. W. Lowdell, A. B. Mehta,
H. G. Prentice, A. V. Hoffbrand, and R. G. Wickremasinghe. 2001. Caspase 8
activation independent of fas (cd95/apo-l) signaling may mediate killing ofb-
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells by cytotoxic drugs or gamma radiation. Blood
98, no. 9: 2800-7.
Kaneko, Y. S., K. Dceda, and M. Nakanishi. 1999. Phorbol ester inhibits DNA damage-
induced apoptosis in u937 cells through activation ofprotein kinase c. Life Sci 65,
no. 21: 2251-8.
178
Karsunky, H., M. Merad, A. Cozzio, I. L. Weissman, and M. G. Manz. 2003. Flt3 ligand
regulates dendritic cell development from flt3+ lymphoid and myeloid-committed
progenitors to flt3+ dendritic cells in vivo. JExp Med 198, no. 2: 305-13.
Kim, K. W., S. H. Kim, J. G. Shin, G. S. Kim, Y. O. Son, S. W. Park, B. H. Kwon, D. W.
Kim, C. H. Lee, M. Y. Sol, M. H. Jeong, B. S. Chung, and C. D. Kang. 2004.
Direct injection of immature dendritic cells into irradiated tumor induces efficient
antitumor immunity. Int J Cancer 109, no. 5: 685-90.
Kitagawa, R. and M. B. Kastan. 2005. The atm-dependent DNA damage signaling
pathway. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 70: 99-109.
Kohrt, H. E., B. B. Turnbull, K. Heydari, J. A. Shizuru, G. G. Laport, D. B. Miklos, L. J.
Johnston, S. Arai, W. K. Weng, R. T. Hoppe, P. W. Lavori, K. G. Blume, R. S.
Negrin, S. Straber, and R. Lowsky. 2009. TIi and atg conditioning with low risk
of graft-versus-host disease retains antitumor reactions after allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation from related and unrelated donors. Blood 1 14,
no. 5: 1099-109.
Koren, H. S., S. J. Anderson, and J. W. Larrick. 1979. In vitro activation of a human
macrophage-like cell line. Nature 279, no. 5711: 328-31.
Krajewski, S., S. Tanaka, S. Takayama, M. J. Schibler, W. Fenton, and J. C. Reed. 1993.
Investigation ofthe subcellular distribution ofthe bcl-2 oncoprotein: Residence in
the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic reticulum, and outer mitochondrial
membranes. Cancer Res 53, no. 19: 4701-14.
Krieg, A. M. 2004. Antitumor applications of stimulating toll-like receptor 9 with cpg
oligodeoxynucleotides. Curr Oncol Rep 6, no. 2: 88-95.
179
Krutzik, P. O., J. M. Irish, G. P. Nolan, and O. D. Perez. 2004. Analysis of protein
phosphorylation and cellular signaling events by flow cytometry: Techniques and
clinical applications. Clin Immunol 110, no. 3: 206-21.
Lan, F., D. Zeng, M. Higuchi, J. P. Higgins, and S. Strober. 2003. Host conditioning with
total lymphoid irradiation and antithymocyte globulin prevents graft-versus-host
disease: The role of cd 1 -reactive natural killer t cells. Biol Blood Marrow
Transplant 9, no. 6: 355-63.
Lan, F., D. Zeng, M. Higuchi, P. Huie, J. P. Higgins, and S. Strober. 2001. Predominance
of nkl.l+tcr alpha beta+ or dx5+tcr alpha beta+ 1 cells in mice conditioned with
fractionated lymphoid irradiation protects against graft-versus-host disease:
"Natural suppressor" Cells. JImmunol 167, no. 4: 2087-96.
Larsson, M., J. F. Fonteneau, and N. Bhardwaj. 2001. Dendritic cells resurrect antigens
from dead cells. Trends Immunol 22, no. 3: 141-8.
Liu, S. Z., S. Z. Jin, X. D. Liu, and Y. M. Sun. 2001. Role of cd28/b7 costimulation and
il-12/il-lO interaction in the radiation-induced immune changes. BMC Immunol 2:
8.
Lowsky, R., T. Takahashi, Y. P. Liu, S. Dejbakhsh-Jones, F. C. Grumet, J. A. Shizuru, G.
G. Laport, K. E. Stockerl-Goldstein, L. J. Johnston, R. T. Hoppe, D. A. Bloch, K.
G. Blume, R. S. Negrin, and S. Strober. 2005. Protective conditioning for acute
graft-versus-host disease. NEngl JMed353, no. 13: 1321-31.
Lugade, A. A., E. W. Sorensen, S. A. Gerber, J. P. Moran, J. G. Frelinger, and E. M.
Lord. 2008. Radiation-induced ifh-gamma production within the tumor
microenvironment influences antitumor immunity. JImmunol 180, no. 5: 3132-9.
180
Luznik, L., J. E. Slansky, S. Jalla, I. Borrello, H. I. Levitsky, D. M. Pardoll, and E. J.
Fuchs. 2003. Successful therapy ofmetastatic cancer using tumor vaccines in
mixed allogeneic bone marrow chimeras. Blood 101, no. 4: 1645-52.
Lynch, D. H., A. Andreasen, E. Maraskovsky, J. Whitmore, R. E. Miller, and J. C. Schuh.
1997. Flt3 ligand induces tumor regression and antitumor immune responses in
vivo. Nat Med 3, no. 6: 625-3 1 .
Magne, N., R. A. Toulon, V. Bottero, C. Didelot, P. V. Houtte, J. P. Gerard, and J. F.
Peyron. 2006. Nf-kappab modulation and ionizing radiation: Mechanisms and
future directions for cancer treatment. Cancer Lett 231, no. 2: 158-68.
Main, J. M. and R. T. Prehn. 1955. Successful skin homografts after the administration of
high dosage ? radiation and homologous bone marrow. JNatl Cancer Inst 1 5, no.
4: 1023-9.
Maraskovsky, E., K. Brasel, M. Teepe, E. R. Roux, S. D. Lyman, K. Shortman, and H. J.
McKenna. 1996. Dramatic increase in the numbers of functionally mature
dendritic cells in flt3 ligand-treated mice: Multiple dendritic cell subpopulations
identified. JExp Med 184, no. 5: 1953-62.
Maris, M. B., B. M. Sandmaier, B. E. Storer, T. Chauncey, M. J. Stuart, R. T. Maziarz, E.
Agura, A. A. Längsten, M. Pulsipher, R. Storb, and D. G. Maloney. 2004.
Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation after fludarabine and 2 gy total
body irradiation for relapsed and refractory mantle cell lymphoma. Blood 104, no.
12: 3535-42.
Matzinger, P. 1994. Tolerance, danger, and the extended family. Annu Rev Immunol 12:
991-1045.
181
________. 2002. The danger model: A renewed sense of self. Science 296, no. 5566:
301-5.
Mayo, M. W., C. Y. Wang, P. C. Cogswell, K. S. Rogers-Graham, S. W. Lowe, C. J. Der,
and A. S. Baldwin, Jr. 1997. Requirement of nf-kappab activation to suppress
p53-independent apoptosis induced by oncogenic ras. Science 278, no. 5344:
1812-5.
McBride, W. H., C. S. Chiang, J. L. Olson, C. C. Wang, J. H. Hong, F. Pajonk, G. J.
Dougherty, K. S. Iwamoto, M. Pervan, and Y. P. Liao. 2004. A sense of danger
from radiation. Radiât Res 162, no. 1: 1-19.
McLellan, A. D., E. B. Brocker, and E. Kampgen. 2000. Dendritic cell activation by
danger and antigen-specific t-cell signalling. Exp Dermatol 9, no. 5: 313-22.
Medzhitov, R. and C. A. Janeway, Jr. 1997. Innate immunity: Impact on the adaptive
immune response. Curr Opin Immunol 9, no. 1 : 4-9.
Medzhitov, R. and C. Janeway, Jr. 2000. Innate immune recognition: Mechanisms and
pathways. Immunol Rev 173: 89-97.
Medzhitov, R., P. Preston-Hurlburt, E. Kopp, A. Stadien, C. Chen, S. Ghosh, and C. A.
Janeway, Jr. 1998. Myd88 is an adaptor protein in the htoll/il-1 receptor family
signaling pathways. MoI Cell 2, no. 2: 253-8.
Melkonyan, H. S., T. E. Ushakova, and S. R. Umansky. 1995. Hsp70 gene expression in
mouse lung cells upon chronic gamma-irradiation. Int JRadiât Biol 68, no. 3:
277-80.
182
Meyn, R. E., L. C. Stephens, K. A. Mason, and D. Medina. 1996. Radiation-induced
apoptosis in normal and pre-neoplastic mammary glands in vivo: Significance of
gland differentiation and p53 status. Ini JCancer 65, no. 4: 466-72.
Mielcarek, M., P. J. Martin, W. Leisenring, M. E. Flowers, D. G. Maloney, B. M.
Sandmaier, M. B. Maris, and R. Storb. 2003. Graft-versus-host disease after
nonmyeloablative versus conventional hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Blood 102, no. 2: 756-62.
Morel, A., N. Fernandez, A. de La Coste, H. Haddada, M. Viguier, B. S. Polla, B.
Antoine, and A. Kahn. 1998. Gamma-ray irradiation induces b7.1 costimulatory
molecule neoexpression in various murine tumor cells. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 46, no. 5: 277-82.
Murphy, M., M. J. Mabruk, P. Lenane, A. Liew, P. McCann, A. Buckley, P. Billet, M.
Leader, E. Kay, and G. M. Murphy. 2002. The expression of p53, p21, bax and
induction of apoptosis in normal volunteers in response to different doses of
ultraviolet radiation. Br JDermatol 147, no. 1: 110-7.
Muul, L. M., C. Silvin, S. P. James, and F. Candotti. 2008. Measurement of proliferative
responses of cultured lymphocytes. Curr Protoc Immunol Chapter 7: Unit 7 10 1-
7 10 24.
Nakano, K. and K. H. Vousden. 2001. Puma, a novel proapoptotic gene, is induced by
p53. MoI Cell 7, no. 3: 683-94.
Nikitina, E. Y. and D. I. Gabrilovich. 2001. Combination ofgamma-irradiation and
dendritic cell administration induces a potent antitumor response in tumor-bearing
183
mice: Approach to treatment ofadvanced stage cancer. Int J Cancer 94, no. 6:
825-33.
Nishioka, A., Y. Ogawa, I. Kubonishi, S. Kataoka, N. Hamada, M. Terashima, T.
Inomata, and S. Yoshida. 1999. An augmentation of fas (cd95/apo-l) antigen
induced by radiation: Flow cytometry analysis of lymphoma and leukemia cell
lines. Int JMoI Med 3, no. 3: 275-8.
Nordberg, J. and E. S. Arner. 2001. Reactive oxygen species, antioxidants, and the
mammalian thioredoxin system. Free Radie Biol Med 31, no. 11: 1287-312.
O'Neill, D. W., S. Adams, and N. Bhardwaj. 2004. Manipulating dendritic cell biology
for the active immunotherapy of cancer. Blood 104, no. 8: 2235-46.
Ogawa, N. and H. Ohashi. 1997. [study of apoptosis in Sjogren's syndrome]. Rinsho Byori
45, no. 7: 643-8.
Oh, Y. T., D. W. Chen, G. J. Dougherty, and W. H. McBride. 2004. Adenoviral
interleukin-3 gene-radiation therapy for prostate cancer in mouse model. Int J
Radiât Oncol Biol Phys 59, no. 2: 579-83.
Olive, P. L. and J. P. Banath. 2004. Phosphorylation ofhistone h2ax as a measure of
radiosensitivity. Int JRadiât Oncol Biol Phys 58, no. 2: 33 1 -5.
Olsson, L, U. Gullberg, I. Ivhed, and K. Nilsson. 1983. Induction ofdifferentiation of the
human histiocytic lymphoma cell line u-937 by 1 alpha,25-
dihydroxycholecalciferol. Cancer Res 43, no. 12 Pt 1: 5862-7.
Oltvai, Z. N., C. L. Milliman, and S. J. Korsmeyer. 1993. Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo
with a conserved homolog, bax, that accelerates programmed cell death. Cell 74,
no. 4: 609-19.
184
Pajonk, F., K. Pajonk, and W. H. McBride. 1999. Inhibition of nf-kappab, clonogenicity,
and radiosensitivity of human cancer cells. JNatl Cancer Inst 91, no. 22: 1956-
60.
Palucka, K. A., N. Taquet, F. Sanchez-Chapuis, and J. C. Gluckman. 1998. Dendritic
cells as the terminal stage of monocyte differentiation. J Immunol 160, no. 9:
4587-95.
Passmore, J. S., P. T. Lukey, and S. R. Ress. 2001. The human macrophage cell line u937
as an in vitro model for selective evaluation ofmycobacterial antigen-specific
cytotoxic t-cell function. Immunology 102, no. 2: 146-56.
Paulos, C. M., C. Wrzesinski, A. Kaiser, C. S. Hinrichs, M. Chieppa, L. Cassard, D. C.
Palmer, A. Boni, P. Muranski, Z. Yu, L. Gattinoni, P. A. Antony, S. A.
Rosenberg, and N. P. Restifo. 2007. Microbial translocation augments the
function ofadoptively transferred self/tumor-specific cd8+ 1 cells via tlr4
signaling. J Clin Invest 1 17, no. 8: 2197-204.
Pillai, A. B., T. I. George, S. Dutt, P. Teo, and S. Strober. 2007. Host nkt cells can
prevent graft-versus-host disease and permit graft antitumor activity after bone
marrow transplantation. JImmunol 178, no. 10: 6242-51.
Radford, I. R. 1999. Initiation of ionizing radiation-induced apoptosis: DNA damage-
mediated or does ceramide have a role? Int JRadiât Biol 75, no. 5: 521-8.
Rahman, L, A. Kode, and S. K. Biswas. 2006. Assay for quantitative determination of
glutathione and glutathione disulfide levels using enzymatic recycling method.
NatProtoc 1, no. 6: 3159-65.
185
Ravi, R., A. Bedi, and E. J. Fuchs. 1998. Cd95 (fas)-induced caspase-mediated
proteolysis ofnf-kappab. Cancer Res 58, no. 5: 882-6.
Ren, H., J. Shen, C. Tomiyama-Miyaji, M. Watanabe, E. Kainuma, M. Inoue, Y.
Kuwano, and T. Abo. 2006. Augmentation of innate immunity by low-dose
irradiation. Cell Immunol 244, no. 1: 50-6.
Rieser, C, G. Bock, H. Klocker, G. Bartsch, and M. Thurnher. 1997. Prostaglandin e2
and tumor necrosis factor alpha cooperate to activate human dendritic cells:
Synergistic activation of interleukin 12 production. JExp Med 186, no. 9: 1603-8.
Robles, A. L, N. A. Bemmels, A. B. Foraker, and C. C. Harris. 2001. Apaf-1 is a
transcriptional target ofp53 in DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Cancer Res 61,
no. 18: 6660-4.
Rovere, P., C. Vallinoto, A. Bondanza, M. C. Crosti, M. Rescigno, P. Ricciardi-
Castagnoli, C. Rugarli, and A. A. Manfredi. 1998. Bystander apoptosis triggers
dendritic cell maturation and antigen-presenting function. JImmunol 161, no. 9:
4467-71.
Russell, J. S., U. Raju, G. J. Gumin, F. F. Lang, D. R. Wilson, T. Huet, and P. J. Tofilon.
2002. Inhibition of radiation-induced nuclear factor-kappab activation by an anti-
ras single-chain antibody fragment: Lack of involvement in radiosensitization.
Cancer Res 62, no. 8: 2318-26.
Ryan, K. M., M. K. Ernst, N. R. Rice, and K. H. Vousden. 2000. Role ofnf-kappab in
p53-mediated programmed cell death. Nature 404, no. 6780: 892-7.
186
Salio, M., N. Dulphy, J. Renneson, M. Herbert, A. McMichael, A. Marchant, and V.
Cerandolo. 2003. Efficient priming of antigen-specific cytotoxic t lymphocytes by
human cord blood dendritic cells. Int Immunol 15, no. 10: 1265-73.
Sancho, D., D. Mourao-Sa, O. P. Joffre, O. Schulz, N. C. Rogers, D. J. Pennington, J. R.
Carlyle, and C. Reis e Sousa. 2008. Tumor therapy in mice via antigen targeting
to a novel, dc-restricted c-type lectin. J Clin Invest 118, no. 6: 2098-1 10.
Scandling, J. D., S. Busque, S. Dejbakhsh-Jones, C. Benike, M. T. Millan, J. A. Shizuru,
R. T. Hoppe, R. Lowsky, E. G. Engleman, and S. Straber. 2008. Tolerance and
chimerism after renal and hematopoietic-cell transplantation. N Engl JMed 358,
no. 4: 362-8.
Scheidereit, C. 2006. Ikappab kinase complexes: Gateways to nf-kappab activation and
transcription. Oncogene 25, no. 51: 6685-705.
Schmitz, M. L., S. Bacher, and O. Dienz. 2003. Nf-kappab activation pathways induced
by t cell costimulation. FASEB J 17, no. 15: 2187-93.
Seino, K., M. Harada, and M. Taniguchi. 2004. Nkt cells are relatively resistant to
apoptosis. Trends Immunol 25, no. 5: 219-21.
Sheard, M. A. 2001. Ionizing radiation as a response-enhancing agent for cd95-mediated
apoptosis. Int J Cancer 96, no. 4: 213-20.
Sheard, M. A., B. Vojtesek, L. Janakova, J. Kovarik, and J. Zaloudik. 1997. Up-
regulation of fas (cd95) in human p53wild-type cancer cells treated with ionizing
radiation. Int J Cancer 73, no. 5: 757-62.
Shortman, K. and Y. J. Liu. 2002. Mouse and human dendritic cell subtypes. Nat Rev
Immunol!, no. 3: 151-61.
187
Siebenlist, U., G. Franzoso, and K. Brown. 1994. Structure, regulation and function of nf-
kappa b. Annu Rev Cell Biol 10: 405-55.
Slavin, S., Z. Fuks, H. S. Kaplan, and S. Straber. 1978. Transplantation of allogeneic
bone marrow without graft-versus-host disease using total lymphoid irradiation. J
Exp Med 147, no. 4: 963-72.
Slavin, S., Z. Fuks, S. Straber, H. Kaplan, R. J. Howard, and D. E. Sutherland. 1979.
Transplantation tolerance across major histocompatibility barriers after total
lymphoid irradiation. Transplantation 28, no. 5: 359-61.
Sojka, D. K., M. Donepudi, J. A. Bluestone, and M. B. Mokyr. 2000. Melphalan and
other anticancer modalities up-regulate b7-l gene expression in tumor cells. J
Immunol 164, no. 12: 6230-6.
Somersan, S., M. Larsson, J. F. Fonteneau, S. Basu, P. Srivastava, and N. Bhardwaj.
2001. Primary tumor tissue lysates are enriched in heat shock proteins and induce
the maturation ofhuman dendritic cells. JImmunol 167, no. 9: 4844-52.
Stammler, G. and M. VoIm. 1996. Expression ofheat shock proteins, glutathione
peroxidase and catalase in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and
nephroblastoma. Cancer Lett 99, no. 1: 35-42.
Steinauer, K. K., I. Gibbs, S. Ning, J. N. French, J. Armstrong, and S. J. Knox. 2000.
Radiation induces upregulation ofcyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2) protein in pc-3 cells.
Int JRadiât Oncol Biol Phys 48, no. 2: 325-8.
Strickland, I. and S. Ghosh. 2006. Use of cell permeable nbd peptides for suppression of
inflammation. Ann Rheum Dis 65 Suppl 3: ÍÜ75-82.
188
Straber, S. 1987. Total lymphoid irradiation in alloimmunity and autoimmunity. J
Pediatr 1 1 1, no. 6 Pt 2: 1051-5.
Straber, S., S. Slavin, Z. Fuks, H. S. Kaplan, M. Gottlieb, C. Bieber, R. T. Hoppe, and F.
C. Grumet. 1979. Transplantation tolerance after total lymphoid irradiation.
Transplant Proc 11, no. 1: 1032-8.
Straber, S., S. Slavin, M. Gottlieb, I. Zan-Bar, D. P. King, R. T. Hoppe, Z. Fuks, F. C.
Grumet, and H. S. Kaplan. 1979. Allograft tolerance after total lymphoid
irradiation (tli). Immunol Rev 46: 87-1 12.
Sundstrom, C. and K. Nilsson. 1976. Establishment and characterization of a human
histiocytic lymphoma cell line (u-937). Ini J Cancer 17, no. 5: 565-77.
Tamada, K., M. Harada, K. Abe, T. Li, and K. Nomoto. 1998. Il-4-producing nkl.l+t
cells are resistant to glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis: Implications for the thl/th2
balance. JImmunol 161, no. 3: 1239-47.
Teitz-Tennenbaum, S., Q. Li, R. Okuyama, M. A. Davis, R. Sun, J. Whitfield, R. N.
Knibbs, L. M. Stoolman, and A. E. Chang. 2008. Mechanisms involved in
radiation enhancement of intratumoral dendritic cell therapy. JImmunother 31,
no. 4: 345-58.
Teitz-Tennenbaum, S., Q. Li, S. Rynkiewicz, F. Ito, M. A. Davis, C. J. McGinn, and A.
E. Chang. 2003. Radiotherapy potentiates the therapeutic efficacy of intratumoral
dendritic cell administration. Cancer Res 63, no. 23: 8466-75.
Tepper, A. D., E. de Vries, W. J. van Blitterswijk, and J. Borst. 1999. Ordering of
ceramide formation, caspase activation, and mitochondrial changes during cd95-
and DNA damage-induced apoptosis. J Clin Invest 103, no. 7: 971-8.
189
Thery, C. and S. Amigorena. 2001. The cell biology of antigen presentation in dendritic
cells. Curr Opin Immunol 13, no. 1: 45-51.
Trinchieri, G. 2003. Interleukin-12 and the regulation of innate resistance and adaptive
immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 3, no. 2: 133-46.
Trinchieri, G. and A. Sher. 2007. Cooperation of toll-like receptor signals in innate
immune defence. Nat Rev Immunol 7, no. 3: 179-90.
Unanue, E. R. 1980. Cooperation between mononuclear phagocytes and lymphocytes in
immunity. NEngl JMed 303, no. 17: 977-85.
Van Antwerp, D. J., S. J. Martin, T. Kafri, D. R. Green, and I. M. Verma. 1996.
Suppression oftnf-alpha-induced apoptosis by nf-kappab. Science 274, no. 5288:
787-9.
Veis, D. J., C. M. Sorenson, J. R. Shutter, and S. J. Korsmeyer. 1993. Bcl-2-deficient
mice demonstrate fulminant lymphoid apoptosis, polycystic kidneys, and
hypopigmented hair. Cell 75, no. 2: 229-40.
Vereecque, R., G. Buffenoir, R. Gonzalez, N. Cambier, D. Hetuin, F. Bauters, P. Fenaux,
and B. Quesnel. 2000. Gamma-ray irradiation induces b7.1 expression in myeloid
leukaemic cells. Br JHaematol 108, no. 4: 825-31.
Verhasselt, V., W. Vanden Berghe, N. Vanderheyde, F. Willems, G. Haegeman, and M.
Goldman. 1999. N-acetyl-1-cysteine inhibits primary human t cell responses at the
dendritic cell level: Association with nf-kappab inhibition. JImmunol 162, no. 5:
2569-74.
Verheij, M. and H. Bartelink. 2000. Radiation-induced apoptosis. Cell Tissue Res 301,
no. 1: 133-42.
190
Verheij, M., G. A. Ruiter, S. F. Zerp, W. J. van Blitterswijk, Z. Fuks, A. Haimovitz-
Friedman, and H. Bartelink. 1998. The role of the stress-activated protein kinase
(sapk/jnk) signaling pathway in radiation-induced apoptosis. Radiother Oncol 47,
no. 3: 225-32.
Wadgaonkar, R., K. M. Phelps, Z. Haque, A. J. Williams, E. S. Silverman, and T.
Collins. 1999. Creb-binding protein is a nuclear integrator of nuclear factor-
kappab and p53 signaling. JBiol Chem ?A, no. 4: 1879-82.
Waer, M., V. Palathumpat, H. Sobis, and M. Vandeputte. 1990. Induction of
transplantation tolerance in mice across major histocompatibility barrier by using
allogeneic thymus transplantation and total lymphoid irradiation. JImmunol 145,
no. 2: 499-504.
Walker, P. R., L. Kokileva, J. LeBlanc, and M. Sikorska. 1993. Detection of the initial
stages ofDNA fragmentation in apoptosis. Biotechniques 15, no. 6: 1032-40.
Wang, C. Y., M. W. Mayo, and A. S. Baldwin, Jr. 1996. Tnf- and cancer therapy-induced
apoptosis: Potentiation by inhibition of nf-kappab. Science ?A, no. 5288: 784-7.
Wang, H. J., Z. Y. Wu, P. Fan, and J. M. Bian. 2005. [the nuclear factor kappa b
activation: The key step of cell proliferation in estrogen receptor-negative breast
cancer cells]. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi 43, no. 15: 1014-6.
Wang, T., Y. C. Hu, S. Dong, M. Fan, D. Tamae, M. Ozeki, Q. Gao, D. Gius, and J. J. Li.
2005. Co-activation of erk, nf-kappab, and gadd45beta in response to ionizing
radiation. JBiol Chem 280, no. 13: 12593-601.
Wang, Y., A. Meng, H. Lang, S. A. Brown, J. L. Konopa, M. S. Kindy, R. A. Schmiedt,
J. S. Thompson, and D. Zhou. 2004. Activation ofnuclear factor kappab in vivo
191
selectively protects the murine small intestine against ionizing radiation-induced
damage. Cancer Res 64, no. 17: 6240-6.
Waiters, D. 1999. Molecular mechanisms of ionizing radiation-induced apoptosis.
Immunol Cell Biol 77, no. 3: 263-71.
Watts, C. and S. Amigorena. 2000. Antigen traffic pathways in dendritic cells. Traffic 1,
no. 4: 312-7.
Williams, G. T. 1991. Programmed cell death: Apoptosis and oncogenesis. Cell 65, no. 7:
1097-8.
Xu, Y. 2006. DNA damage: A trigger of innate immunity but a requirement for adaptive
immune homeostasis. Nat Rev Immunol 6, no. 4: 261-70.
Yang, C. R., C. Wilson-Van Patten, S. M. Planchón, S. M. Wuerzberger-Davis, T. W.
Davis, S. Cuthill, S. Miyamoto, and D. A. Boothman. 2000. Coordinate
modulation of spi, nf-kappa b, and p53 in confluent human malignant melanoma
cells after ionizing radiation. FASEB J 14, no. 2: 379-90.
Yang, J., X. Liu, K. Bhalla, C. N. Kim, A. M. Ibrado, J. Cai, T. I. Peng, D. P. Jones, and
X. Wang. 1997. Prevention ofapoptosis by bcl-2: Release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria blocked. Science 275, no. 5303: 1 129-32.
Yao, Z., Y. Liu, J. Jones, and S. Strober. 2009. Differences in bcl-2 expression by t-cell
subsets alter their balance after in vivo irradiation to favor cd4+bcl-2hi nkt cells.
Eur JImmunol 39, no. 3: 763-75.
Zanke, B. W., K. Boudreau, E. Rubie, E. Winnett, L. A. Tibbies, L. Zon, J. Kyriakis, F.
F. Liu, and J. R. Woodgett. 1996. The stress-activated protein kinase pathway
192
mediates cell death following injury induced by cis-platinum, uv irradiation or
heat. Curr Biol 6, no. 5: 606-13.
Zhang, G. and S. Ghosh. 2000. Molecular mechanisms ofnf-kappab activation induced
by bacterial lipopolysaccharide through toll-like receptors. JEndotoxin Res 6, no.
6: 453-7.
Zhou, B. B. and S. J. Elledge. 2000. The DNA damage response: Putting checkpoints in
perspective. Nature 408, no. 681 1: 433-9.
Zong, Z. W., T. M. Cheng, Y. P. Su, X. Z. Ran, N. Li, G. P. Ai, and H. Xu. 2006. Crucial
role of sdf-l/cxcr4 interaction in the recruitment of transplanted dermal
multipotent cells to sublethally irradiated bone marrow. JRadiât Res (Tokyo) 47,
no. 3-4: 287-93.
193
