Industrial Upgrading in India's 
Information Technology Enabled Service Industry 
by 
Eric R. Eide 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
(Sociology) 
in The University of Michigan 
2011 
Doctoral Committee: 
Professor Jeffery M. Paige, Chair 
Professor Mark S. Mizruchi 
Associate Professor Jason D. Owen-Smith 
Associate Professor Frederick Fitzgerald Wherry 
Professor Ashutosh Varshney, Brown University 
UMI Number: 3476310 
All rights reserved 
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. 
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed, 
a note will indicate the deletion. 
UMT 
Dissertation Publishing 
UMI 3476310 
Copyright 2011 by ProQuest LLC. 
All rights reserved. This edition of the work is protected against 
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. 
uest 
ProQuest LLC 
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346 
© Eric Eide 
2011 
Where the mind is without fear 
and the head is held high; 
Where knowledge is free; 
Where the world has not been 
broken up into fragments by narrow 
domestic walls; 
Where words come out from 
the depth of truth; 
Where tireless striving stretches its 
arms towards perfection; 
Where the clear stream of reason 
has not lost its way into the dreary 
desert sand of dead habit; 
Where the mind is led forward by 
thee into ever-widening thought and 
action... 
Into that heaven of freedom, my 
Father, let my country awake. 
Rabindranath Tagore1 
Rabindranath Tagore is considered the national poet of India and his work was influential in the resistance 
in leading up to Indian Independence. This passage has appeared in two government reports: (Gupta, 2002) 
And the Introduction from the National Knowledge Commission report to the Nation in 2006: (National 
Knowledge Commission, 2007). 
Acknowledgements 
I would have never finished this dissertation if it were not for the help and 
guidance of my committee, my network of scholars and friends, the women and men that 
agreed to be interviewed, and my family. 
I was fortunate to have been mentored by an extremely talented dissertation 
committee. This project and my graduate school career began and finished under Jeff 
Paige's guidance. Mark Mizruchi provided insightful guidance from the beginning of the 
project to its very end. Fred Wherry and Jason Owen-Smith provided detailed comments 
on various draft chapters as well as the whole of dissertation. I am grateful to Ashutosh 
Varshney for sharing his expertise and his network of contacts in India with me. I also 
want to thank Jayati Lai for her input on my earlier formulations of this and other 
projects. I would like to thank Greta Krippner for providing thoughtful comments on the 
framing of chapter three of this dissertation. I also want to thank John Foran and Kum 
Kum Bhavnani at UCSB who first ignited my passion for economic and social 
development in the global south. 
This dissertation would not have been possible without funding support from the 
American Institute of Indian Studies, Rackham and the Department of Sociology, the 
International Institute's Global Transformation Seminar, the William Davidson Institute, 
and the Center for International Business Education (CIBE) at the University of 
Michigan. Nor would this dissertation have been possible without the candid stories from 
my interview subjects and informants. I am grateful to all of the people who freely gave 
ii 
their time to answer my questions. I am particularly indebted to the management and 
employees at Evalueserve, Infosys, Wipro's Global Radiology Centre, Manipal Hospital, 
Teleradiology Solutions, Massachusetts General Hospital, NASSCOM, CII, MindTree, 
TCS, and to the officials in the government at the central and state levels. A warm thanks 
goes to Achaiah Palekanda who not only went out of his way to give me access to his 
company and others in his network, but is also a great friend. I must also thank Israel 
Ben-Ishai for being an informant, a source of comparative knowledge and trends in 
outsourcing, and much more. 
There are a number of faculty members and institutions in India that I must also 
thank. Dr. Rupa Chanda at IIM-B deserves thanks for helping to create an academic 
home for me at IIM-B during my field work, which included affiliation, access to the 
university library, computer lab, and most importantly, her time. Carol Upadhya and A.R. 
Vasavi at NIAS and S. Sadagopan at IIIT-B provided background and contacts for this 
research. Professor Karanth and Professor Gayithri at ISEC also provided needed 
academic affiliation. I want to thank the entire staff at AIIS. I am particularly grateful to 
Purnima Mehta and the AIIS staff for helping me negotiate Indian regulations, get 
established in India, and for making arrangements for my numerous trips to Delhi. 
This dissertation benefitted from the help of my colleagues at the University of 
Michigan. In particular, Avi Astor, Alex Gerber, and Katherine Luke deserve heartfelt 
thanks for providing written and verbal feedback throughout the life cycle of the project, 
including reading early drafts of literature reviews, dissertation prospectus, and chapters 
of the dissertation. Our consistent transcontinental conference calls over the years 
(spanning Ann Arbor, Barcelona, Poland, Berlin, and Bangalore) to workshop various 
iii 
aspects of our dissertations was a lifeline to me, keeping me connected both personally 
and professionally, to a community of scholars. Other colleagues that deserve special 
thanks in helping me build a research network in India include Jeannie and Trevor Thrall 
as well as Christina Mendoza. I also want to thank those faculty and graduate students 
involved in the Economic Sociology Workshop and the Culture, History, and Power 
Workshop in the Sociology Department at the University of Michigan for providing 
valuable feedback on chapters from this project. 
A number of friends listened to me talk about my dissertation and provided much 
needed distractions from it. Russell Vare deeply influenced mc intellectually and 
personally over the past sixteen years and was again a great roommate for the fun filled 
months he stayed with me in India. I'm lucky to have his friendship. Much love to Ozan 
for discussing this research at all stages and for providing personal support to me while in 
graduate school. Other Ann Arbor friends that deserve special thanks include Minayo 
Nasali, Pelema Morrice, Alex Beringer, Scott McCann, Ryan Gittins,*Cathy Miller, 
Katherine Luke, Mike Pryplush, Urmila Venkatesh, Tyler Cornelius, Lynne Gratz, 
Zakiya Luna, Dana Levin, Andrew Van Alstyne, Dan Packel, and David Lopez. I want to 
thank my SoCal friends Pete Kotecki, Dave McLean, Armen Avakian, and Craig 
Carbajal, for sustaining me from breaks from my studies and for staying in touch. Dave, 
thanks for helping to explain the world of finance to me and putting mc in touch with 
people from your network. 
In India, I must thank Mathew Abraham, Sasidaran Gopalan, and Mohit Sinha 
who were both my academic colleagues at IIM-B and the best personal friends. I 
remember with fondness our stimulating conversations over coffee in the IIM courtyard. I 
iv 
want to thank Mathew in particular who served as a sounding board for my emerging 
dissertation ideas and for keeping me safe from harm. I could ask for nothing more in a 
friend. To Chandan Gowda, for providing me guidance on and in India, helping me build 
an academic community there, and finding me accommodations under time pressure. To 
Prashanta Bhat for Vidha and your hospitality. Other friends that helped make India home 
during field research include Krishna Visant, Sanath Reddy, Anuroop Ramachandra, PT 
George, Amoug, and Alan Hawkes. To my friends in J.P. Nagar, 5th Phase, the 
"bikewallah" brothers, Chand who always had fresh fruit and a smile for me outside my 
front door, and to all the honest auto drivers. To Sohan and Sudipto for Sundays spent 
rock climbing at Turahalli and Radgodlu, which were some of my favorite memories of 
my "fieldwork." Thanks to Craig Hollins for teaching me to ride a motorcycle in India 
(against the advice of my Lonely Planet Guide book) and for lending me his Royal 
Enfield to ride. It made all the difference in the world! To the Roys, without their 
influence, a dissertation on India may have never materialized. Special thanks go to 
Rupali and Biman for introducing me to India and for providing countless hours of 
Bangla language practice and to Tanuka who encouraged me to pursue my PhD and to 
select this dissertation topic. 
To my parents, Linda, Don, and Debi, for supporting me emotionally and 
materially during my formative years and in my relapse back into student life as an adult. 
My mother, Linda, instilled in me a love for reading, education, and travel without which 
I would likely have not had the inclination to travel so far in search of answers. My father 
Don, an entrepreneur with a background in finance, helped me understand my interview 
subjects in a way I couldn't have otherwise. My Grandfather, Richard Modderman, 
v 
inspired my love for politics and history, even if I took these interests to dramatically 
divergent conclusions from his own. To Martha Modderman, Susan Schrepper, and Joan 
Prijital for showing me the value of teaching before I ever had to and for their small 
forms of encouragement along the way. I want to thank my sister Shann for leading me 
into the world of sociology and for shaping me in so many ways. And to my sister 
Jennifer, for inspiring me while waging more heroic battles in the elementary schools in 
south central Los Angeles. 
And finally, to my partner Liz Ben-Ishai, who has been my biggest supporter, 
academically and personally. She carefully read and provided thoughtful suggestions on 
the entire dissertation, putting aside her own heavy teaching and research responsibilities. 
She has heard and read more than she ever cares to know about India and I am 
particularly grateful to her for her patience throughout the fieldwork and writing stages. 1 
can't wait to start our next chapter together and, someday, to show you that far away 
country that was my home. 
vi 
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgements ii 
List of Tables ix 
List of Images x 
Abbreviations & Acronyms xi 
Abstract xiii 
Chapter 1: Introduction to India's Offshore Service Model 1 
I. Foundations for Industrial Development & the Shift to Services 3 
II. The Argument 7 
III. Emergence of an association-led developmental model 10 
IV. Inter-firm learning and knowledge transfer 18 
V. Knowledge creation and firm-led employee upgrading 19 
VI. Cultural labor and skills 20 
VII. Design & Case Selection 22 
VIII. Method 25 
IX. Plan of the Dissertation 27 
Chapter 2: The Aspiring Developmental State 31 
I. Introduction 31 
II. Shifting roles of the Indian Developmental State 34 
III. Policy Frameworks and the Emergence of Firms 42 
IV. In Pursuit of Saraswati: Culture, Status, and Knowledge in India 48 
V. Higher Education and the Development of the IT Industry 51 
VI. Conclusion 60 
Chapter 3: In Partnership with the State: Trade Associations' Role in Fostering 
Development in the Indian IT Industry 65 
I. Introduction 65 
II. Trade Associations in India's IT and ITES Industries: Historical Development.. 67 
III. Recognition of Software as a Strategic Industry 73 
IV. Lobbying and Deregulation 75 
V. Public Relations and Impression Management 78 
VI. Trade Associations in India's IT and ITES industries: Role as Developmental 
Actors 80 
VII. Conclusion 96 
vii 
Chapter 4: Knowledge Transfer 100 
I. Introduction 100 
II. Limitations on Upgrading 104 
III. Knowledge Transfer in Financial Services: The Case of Infosys Knowledge 
Services 109 
IV. Knowledge Transfer in Financial Services: The Case of Evalueserve 115 
V. The Politics of Medical Services Offshore Outsourcing 121 
VI. Knowledge Transfer in Medical Services: The Case of Global Radiology Centre 
125 
VII. Knowledge Transfer in Medical Services: The Case of Tcleradiology Solutions 
132 
VIII. Conclusion 136 
Chapter 5: Firm Training Programs: The Construction of Knowledge in Offshore 
Services 143 
I. Introduction 143 
II. Training Programs: Three Vignettes 144 
III. Training Programs as Skills Building 148 
IV. Training Programs as Image Management 159 
V. Conclusion 163 
Chapter 6: Cultural Labor & Industrial Upgrading 166 
I. Introduction 166 
II. Industry Development, Skills, and Culture 168 
III. Theorizing Cultural Labor 172 
IV. Cultural Labor and Upgrading 177 
V. Producing Cultural Laborers: Training Processes 186 
VI. Labor Process Control and Constraints on Cultural Labor 189 
VII. Conclusion 192 
Chapter 7: Conclusion 195 
I. Institutions and Mechanisms for Upgrading 196 
II. Challenging Development Paradigms 202 
III. Broader lessons for policy makers 208 
IV. Looking Ahead: Emerging Upgrading Opportunities in India's ITES Service 
Sector 209 
V. Industry focus on India's Domestic Market 211 
VI. Replication of the Indian model? 215 
Appendix 224 
References 228 
vm 
List of Tables 
Table 1.1: Skill Upgrading in Indian ITES Exports 3 
Table 1.2: Summary View of Medical Service Firms 29 
Table 1.3: Summary View of Financial Service Firms 30 
Table 2.1: State Roles and Associated Growth Rate 35 
Table 2.2: Bar Graph of State Roles and Associated Growth Rate 35 
Table 2.3: Top 20 IT and ITES Firms with Operations in India 47 
Table 2.4: Establishment of New Central Higher Education Institutions 59 
Table 2.5: Major Milestones and Events in Indian IT Industry 62 
Table 2.6: Key Institutes of National Importance & Milestones in Higher Education 64 
Table 3.1: Knowledge professionals employed in the Indian IT BPO sector 82 
Table 3.2: City wise spread of NASSCOM Membership 91 
Table 3.3: Development of Tier II and Tier III Indian Cities 91 
Table 4.1: Overview of Firm Sources of Knowledge 103 
Table 4.2: Infosys Five Stage Project Approach to Process Transition 112 
Table 4.3: Number of Job Listings per Job Seeker 141 
Table 4.4: Advertisements for radiologist jobs 142 
Table 5.1: India & US Radiologists to Population Ratio 148 
Table 5.2: Comparison of Knowledge Creation Approaches in Financial Services 152 
Table 5.3: Comparison of Knowledge Creation Approaches in Medical Services 157 
Table 6.1: Goals and Skills from Business Process Training Course 194 
Table 6.2: GRC US based client's internal process for performing 3D scans 194 
Table 6.3: Offshore service delivery work process for same US based client 194 
Table 6.4: Cultural Labor Continuum of Surface and Deep Acting 194 
Table 7.1: Dollar to Rupee Currency Exchange January 2006-December 2010 223 
IX 
List of Images 
Image 1: India - basic country level data 224 
Image 2: Infosys campus 225 
Image 3: Lobby of Infosys development center 225 
Image 4: Infosys's business process outsourcing center 226 
Image 5: Call center workforce and workers 226 
Image 6: Call center office cubicles and workers 226 
Image 7: Teleradiology Solutions office 227 
x 
Abbreviations & Acronyms 
1 crore (cr) = 10 million 
1 lakh (1)= 100, 000 
ABR: American Board certified Radiologist. Medical doctor that is credentialed and 
legally able to provide diagnosis for patients in the United State's healthcare market. 
ASSOCHAM: Association of Chamber of Commerce: trade association for Indian 
companies. 
BTech: Bachelor of Technology: undergraduate technology-related degree. 
BPO: Business process outsourcing. 
CII: Confederation of Indian Industry. 
DBS: Developmental bureaucratic state. 
DNS: Developmental network state. 
DoE: Department of Electronics: Indian government department, which oversees policy 
formation and implementation in all branches of electronics. 
DoT: Department of Telecommunications: Indian government department, which 
oversees telecommunications policy formation and implementation. 
EPZ: Export processing zone: designated areas within a country separated from domestic 
tariff area in which specific export-orientated regulation apply. 
ELI: Export led industrialization. 
FICCI: Federation for Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry: trade association for 
Indian companies. 
Gol: Government of India. 
GRC: Global Radiology Centre: International teleradiology operation established 
through the partnership of Wipro and Manipal Hospital. 
XI 
IIT: Indian Institute of Technology: System of top Indian technical universities. 
IIM: Indian Institute of Management: System of top Indian technical universities. 
HIT: Indian Institute of Information Technology. 
ISI: import substitution industrialization. 
ITES: Information technology enabled services. 
KPO: Knowledge process outsourcing. 
LPO: Legal process outsourcing. 
MAIT: Manufacturers' Association for Information Technology: the main trade 
association for Indian hardware companies. A separate software industry association split 
from MAIT to form NASSCOM in 1988. 
NASSCOM: National Associations of Software and Service Companies: The primary 
trade association representing the Software, IT and ITES industries. 
PPP: Public-private partnerships. 
STPI: Software technology parks of India 
xn 
Abstract 
Industrial Upgrading in India's 
Information Technology Enabled Service Industry 
by 
Eric R. Eide 
Professor Jeffery M. Paige, Chair 
This dissertation analyzes industrial upgrading, the process by which industries move to 
higher value products and services in India's "offshore outsourcing" industry. The 
dissertation draws upon 101 semi-structured interviews with Indian managers, workers, 
trade association and government officials, collected during 14 months of field research 
in India, conducted between July 2006 and May 2009. The study examines how India 
obtained the knowledge and skills required to move up from low-level back office and 
call center work into knowledge intensive service delivery within the span of a decade. 
Four causal mechanisms are identified that enabled this upward move: 1) the role of trade 
associations 2) firm level knowledge transfer through migration and client interaction 3) 
firm level training programs and 4) firm level creation of cultural knowledge. Trade 
associations and firms emerged as the central actors driving industry development, with 
the state playing an increasingly supporting role. This institutional arrangement 
represents a departure from the Indian state's traditional approach to development and the 
xiii 
role of the state in other successful developmental models. A key reason why industry, 
rather than the state, assumed a leadership role in development is based upon the 
interactive nature of services themselves, which requires closer coordination between 
firms than manufacturing. The design of the dissertation centers upon the analysis of four 
firms that provide financial or medical services. Financial and medical services were 
selected based upon their different propensities to specialize within industries and expand 
in breadth across industries, thereby addressing the twin dimensions of industrial 
upgrading, scope and depth. 
x i v 
Chapter 1 
Introduction to India's Offshore Service Model 
During the early years of the millennium the world increasingly saw images in the 
media of a new, "Shining India," with depictions of relatively affluent, educated workers 
inside gleaming new office parks in urban centers (See Images 1-5 in Appendix). This 
representation of India was spurred by the rising economic prosperity of India, driven by 
a transformative shift to a service based economy that is best exemplified by the runaway 
success of "offshore outsourcing."" This industry emerged as India's fastest growing in 
terms of gross domestic product (GDP) and is the leading developing country provider of 
offshore outsourcing services, commanding 55 percent of the global market (Dani, 
Ramesh, & Singh, 2011). The total Information Technology (IT) and Information 
Technology Enabled Services (ITES) service industry in India reached USD 71.7 billion, 
accounting for 5.8 percent of India's GDP (NASSCOM, 2009a). India's economic 
success in this industry has prompted other developing economies (e.g., China, Brazil, 
Philippines, Poland, Russia and South Africa) to try to replicate the high growth rates 
associated with India's service export model (Business India Intelligence, 2006). 
"Shining India" was a political slogan used to capture the feeling of optimism in the wake of the IT and 
ITES service boom in 2003. The slogan was adopted and popularized by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) 
during the run up to the 2004 Indian central election, which they lost. I, and my interview subjects, use the 
phrase "shining India" as a symbol of the IT boom, rather than a reference to the 2004 political election it is 
also associated with. 
3 Offshore outsourcing refers to the practice of hiring an external firm to perform a business function from 
an overseas country from where the good or service will be sold or consumed. This differs from 
outsourcing, which refers to hiring an external domestic firm, and offshoring, which refers to hiring foreign 
labor by a company subsidiary. Offshore outsourcing is theoretically of the greatest interest because it 
requires domestic firms in developing countries to build technical and managerial knowledge and firm level 
capabilities. 
1 
The ITES industry began in India in the mid-1990s with back office data entry, 
followed by call centers; buoyed by labor savings of 60 to 70 percent relative to 
developed markets. Since 2000 India has achieved a measure of success in moving into 
"knowledge-intensive" professional services, such as radiology, accounting, research and 
development, and legal services (Aggarwal, 2010a; Evalueserve, 2003; 
Knowledge ©Wharton, 2007; F. Levy & Yu, 2006; Pollack, 2003; Timmons, 2010). 
India's market share of the "knowledge process outsourcing" (KPO) industry is 70 
percent world wide and the industry is expected to grow to $17 billion in revenue by 
2013 (Aggarwal, 2010a) (see Table 1.1: Skill Upgrading for Indian ITES Exports). 
How did a developing country that was best known for its high rates of poverty, 
illiteracy, and a "Hindu rate of growth"4 that hovered between 3 and 4 percent gross 
domestic product (GDP) give rise to the developing world's most dynamic, high growth, 
and knowledge intensive service sector? More specifically, how did India obtain the 
knowledge and skills required to move up from low-level back office and call center work 
into knowledge intensive service delivery within the span of a decade? Who are the key 
actors in industry development and promotion? What are the skills and knowledge 
required for this sector? What are the sources of industry capabilities? What are the key 
industrial policies that enabled the sector and how were they crafted? The focus of this 
dissertation is on the development and creation of the skills, knowledge, actors, and 
policies that help to explain this transformation. 
4 This commonly used expression is attributed to economist Raj Krishna, although I was unable to 
determine where he first used the term. A number of studies make reference to this term. See Chibber 
(2004). 
2 
Table 1.1: Skill Upgrading in Indian ITES Exports 
Skill 
Low Skilled 
Services 
Medium 
Skill 
Services 
Knowledge 
Intensive 
Services 
Typical role 
profile 
Data entry 
Call center 
Professional 
work (financial 
planning, 
radiology, etc) 
Emergence 
Late-1980s-
mid-1990s 
Mid-1990s 
Early-2000s 
Skill Profile/ Training 
Computer skills required. College 
education desired, but not required 
Command of foreign language & 
interpersonal skills required. Usually 
college educated. 
Interpretive abilities, college degree, 
additional training required. Often post 
graduate training & professional 
certification 
/. Foundations for Industrial Development & the Shift to Services 
Economic development, at its most macro scale, is a sequential shift from 
employment concentration in agriculture to manufacturing industries and finally to 
services (Clark, 1940; Fisher, 1935). Yet, such shifts are not inevitable or even likely. 
Many regions in the world, such as much of Latin America, continue to export extractive 
commodities and agricultural products to the rest of the world thereby occupying the 
same low-level position in the global economy that they have occupied for centuries 
(Bunker, 1984; Cardoso, 1972; Evans, 1979; Frank, 1972; Wallerstein, 1974). While 
there is a remarkable stability in the economic position of states in the international 
division of labor, some developing states (China, India, South Korea, Malaysia, Taiwan, 
and Thailand in Asia; Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico in Latin America; and Turkey 
in the Middle East) have moved into increasingly sophisticated manufacturing and 
technological industries. This industrial shift was instrumental in raising the general 
standard of living for the citizens of these countries. 
3 
The key mechanism that permits these countries to transition into manufacturing 
and technological industries is "industrial upgrading." Industrial upgrading is defined as a 
process where economic actors, such as nations, industries, firms, and workers, move 
from low-value to high-value activities (Gereffi, 2005). Upgrading may occur along two 
dimensions: specialization within an industry and increased breadth across multiple 
industries. Industrial upgrading success relies upon a mix of different government 
policies, institutions, corporate strategies, technologies, and worker skills (Gereffi, 2005, 
p. 171). A key enabler of this process is what Alice Amsden refers to as the creation of 
knowledge-based assets, which are firm specific technical and managerial capabilities 
(Amsden, 2001). Knowledge in this sense is more than mere access to information. 
Amsden's refinement of the way knowledge is used as a competitive advantage for 
developing nations builds upon a broad tradition that highlights the centrality of 
knowledge. The role of information and knowledge has been referred to as the defining 
feature this stage of capitalism (Bell, 1973; Castells, 1996; NASSCOM, 2006b). Other 
scholars have argued that knowledge has become the key resource (Drucker, 1969) and 
access to it shapes the competitive advantage of both firms (Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995) 
and nations (Castells, 1996). 
Yet, a range of scholarship has also challenged the common conceptions of both 
knowledge and skills. Knowledge, at its most basic level, is constructed (Berger & 
Luckmann, 1967). More recently, some scholars have rejected treating knowledge as a 
commodity, classifying it instead as a "fictitious" or "quasi commodity" (Jessop, 2007). 
In a similar fashion, scholars from divergent theoretical traditions have problematized 
positivist conceptions of skill, which tend to define skill in terms of personal attributes or 
4 
job complexity (Spenner, 1979, 1983). Neo-classical economists, adopting a positivist 
orientation, tend to view skill development in terms of investment in "human capital," or 
number of years of vocational training, formal education, and years on the job (Becker, 
1962, 1996). However, neo-Weberian and social constructionist approaches to skills 
emphasize their relational nature. From this perspective skill construction depends upon 
the relationship between tasks, the supply and demand of people who complete tasks, and 
those who fill positions or are excluded (Attewell, 1990, pp. 444-445). Credentialism and 
professional labor monopolies are two ways skills are defined and groups are excluded 
from job consideration (Abbott, 1988; Collins, 1979). The constructed or potentially 
fictitious quality of knowledge, and the relational nature of skills, however, does not 
make either knowledge or skills less important to development. In fact, as this 
dissertation will suggest, the ability of industries in developing countries to construct 
knowledge, and perceptions of it, is itself a key capability for development and a crucial 
piece of building knowledge based assets. Development that creates knowledge-based 
assets is distinguished from exploitative extractive developmental practices that may lead 
to economic growth, but not a long-term sustainable advantage. 
Scholarly analysis of industrial development and upgrading is concentrated on 
high-tech manufacturing and retail industries, rather than services. A reason why services 
received comparatively less attention is that a broad group of social scientists initially did 
not believe services could be delivered from geographically distant locations. This was 
because services required interaction between a producer and consumer and were 
difficult to transport (Lievens, Moenaert, & Jegers, 1999; Lovelock & Gummesson, 
2004). Social scientists noted that the manufacturing subcontracting relationships well 
5 
documented in manufacturing industries were not possible in the trade of modern 
services: 
The major difference between a mature high-tech industry and a modern service is 
that there is no international (or intranational) subcontracting. Foreign firms 
cannot out-source the provision of many services in the same way that they can 
out-source the manufacture of certain products (Amsden & Chu, 2003, p. 13). 
The empirical realties of a large globally dispersed ITES industry that is increasingly 
using subcontracting relationships challenge this assertion. The global spread of 
telephony and Internet technologies made it possible for a growing subset of services to 
be produced offshore during the 1990s, intensifying during the early 2000s. This scaling 
up of services in developing countries was in due in part to progress in the 
communications infrastructure in developing countries, which reduced the costs and 
difficulty in procuring reliable communication technologies to trade services at a large 
scale over long distances.5 Today, the IT enabled service industry is following the basic 
trend of increasing fragmentation observed in manufacturing production, splitting up 
activities that increasingly stretch across borders, in order to reduce costs and gain access 
to the right mix of skills. 
An analysis of industrial upgrading in services is warranted because developing 
countries are now beginning to join developed countries in transitioning to a service-
based economy. Services have emerged as the largest and fastest-growing sector in the 
global economy during the last two decades, providing more than 60 percent of global 
output (Banga, 2005b). Developed economies tend to have a high concentration of 
service employment, however, some developing countries, like their developed country 
counterparts, are also becoming service-based economies. The Indian economy is one 
5 The rise in communication technologies globally helped to challenge Canada's dominance in service trade 
with the United States. 
6 
example of a country now dominated by services. Services constituted 50 percent GDP in 
2004, while industry and agriculture were 27 and 23 percent respectively (Banga, 2005a). 
This global economic shift to service work underscores the need to understand potential 
upgrading processes within developing countries' service industries. An analysis of the 
ITES sector, specifically, is important not only because it involves different agents (i.e. 
skilled white-collar workers) than those found in manufacturing and retail industries, but 
also because existing theories for understanding outsourcing do not explicitly consider 
the transmission of knowledge required in the international offshoring of services 
(Trefler, 2005). 
//. The Argument 
The major findings of this dissertation complicate the foregoing understanding of 
upgrading. The Indian model of service development is shaped by the interaction of 
multiple actors, including the state, trade associations, and firms, who work to upgrade 
industry skills and to signal industry credibility in higher-level skills to the export market. 
This model of development emerged only after several constitutive shifts in the Indian 
state's approach. After independence, India was committed to industrial development and 
pursued a traditional state-led industrialization policy, which provided key investments in 
education and created industrial policies that supported subsequent IT and ITES industry 
development.6 The state underwent reforms in response to internal and external pressures, 
6 This dissertation focuses on IT enabled services (ITES). IT and ITES are separate industries, but are 
commonly grouped together by policy makers and in policy documents and represented by the same 
industry trade association (NASSCOM). The ITES industry was built upon the communication 
infrastructure and policy frameworks that were established through interaction between the state and the IT 
industry that occurred earlier. The acquisition of leading ITES firms by leading IT companies, which began 
in 2002, makes it difficult to analytically separate these industries even while the work differs in scope and 
skill requirements. As a result, I will often group these industries together, referring to them collectively at 
7 
which in turn shaped its role and approach to development. The business association-led 
developmental model that emerged during this shift addressed constraints facing IT and 
ITES industry development. Yet, the state and associations were not the only key actors 
in the rise of this sector. Indian firms also built and gained knowledge through the 
migration of technical professionals, through client relationships that facilitated 
knowledge transfer, and through firm level training programs. In addition to technical 
capabilities, which were required in manufacturing industries, this knowledge included 
cultural capabilities, which I argue are critical to ITES industry development. These new 
capabilities are specific cultural repertoires that meet the expectations of customers, who 
are often located in regions far away from the worker providing the service. Analyzing 
cultural knowledge as well as other related practices and norms adopted by firms in their 
interactions with clients, I argue that upgrading depends upon both a deepening of 
industry skills and an ability to signal credibility in providing higher-level work. 
The dissertation advances four central theses that explain the successful upgrading 
of India's ITES industry into knowledge intensive services: 
1. Emergence of an association-led developmental model: An industry led, state 
supported model of development emerged from a more traditional state led 
(industry-constrained) pattern of industrialization. Trade associations were a key 
emergent actor, influencing neoliberal state practices, and helping to refine and 
draft industrial and education policies in key areas that enable industrial 
upgrading. 
times as the "IT industry," when discussing industry constraints and policy formation. "ITES" is a broad 
umbrella term that emphasizes a mode of delivery that encompasses Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) 
and the higher value Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) sub-sectors, which are defined in terms of 
their function and skill-set respectively. 
8 
2. Inter-firm learning and knowledge transfer: Knowledge transfer from 
organizations based in developed countries to those in developing countries is 
crucial for industry upgrading into higher value services. This transfer of 
knowledge may occur though two mechanisms: migration of technical labor and 
through client relationships that facilitate learning. Mediating factors, however, 
determine the extent and speed to which knowledge transfer occurs. These factors 
include task integration with client business processes and systems, the authority 
of professions, and the power of credentials. 
3. Knowledge creation and firm-led employee upgrading: Industry knowledge is 
created through high levels of firm investments in skills training, the construction 
of corporate training facilities, and universities. Firm level investments in 
employee education supplementing the skills created through the educational 
system. 
4. Cultural labor and skills: Interaction intensive services required a new set of 
skills and capabilities for development, composed of a number of learned distinct 
cultural skills, scripts, and behaviors that permit workers to mimic the 
communication style and cultural expectations of their customers and mask (or 
understate) their national identity from overseas customers. 
I will elaborate upon each of these four claims under each of the proceeding sub-
headings, offering some background and context for the in-depth analyses in the chapters 
that follow. 
9 
/// . Emergence of an association-led developmental model 
The appropriate role of the state in the economy is a perennial theoretical and 
practical question. While previous debates tend to treat the state and economy as distinct 
and separate entities, contemporary scholars increasingly reject this binary conception 
(Block, 1994; Block & Evans, 2005). Some writers argue that states and markets are not 
engaged in a zero sum game where one benefits at the expense of the other (J. D. Levy, 
2006). Rather states and markets historically evolved together and markets require the 
regulation that states provide (K. Polanyi, 2001 [1944]). Yet, the pervasive dichotomous 
view between the state and the market still prevents researchers from understanding how 
state and market actors coordinate policy (Krippner, 2007). 
Contemporary states are grappling with new challenges posed by the economy, 
technology, and ideology (J. D. Levy, 2006). A growing body of work argues that state 
authority is in decline due to the increasing pressures of globalization (Sassen, 2001; 
Slaughter, 2004; Strange, 1996). Technological innovations and increased access to the 
Internet have accelerated the movement of capital and jobs across borders, further 
dispersing production globally (Friedman, 2005). In the face of these technological 
changes states have lost a measure of power to control capital and firms, which have 
become more mobile than ever before. While critics insist that arguments about the 
irrelevance of the state are overdrawn because states retain control over their territorial 
borders, control their populations, and define citizenship, they concede that states have 
relinquished some authority to supranational organizations (Hirst & Thompson, 1995). 
State industrial policy is constrained by the rise of supranational organizations. 
Regulatory agreements (e.g. TRIMS, GATS, and TRIPS) make illegal many of the 
10 
developmental policy instruments successfully used by East Asian developmental states 
to nurture their own strategic manufacturing industries (Wade, 2003). The actions of the 
WTO are emblematic of the policies supported by many supranational organizations, 
such as the IMF and World Bank, and the "Washington Consensus" more generally.7 The 
Washington Consensus widely advocated a shift from state-led governance toward 
market-oriented policies and also encouraged a re-framing of developmental problems 
and policy justifications (Gore, 2000). These supranational policy prescriptions imposed 
upon developing states reflect the neoliberal ideology that guided them. 
The ascendancy of neoliberal ideology poses its own set of challenges to state 
authority and practices. Neoliberalism as a theory lacks coherence,8 but finds it most 
coherent expression within the state (Plant, 2010). Despite this incoherence neoliberal 
policies tends to reflect one or more of the following ideas: free markets, market 
fundamentalism,9 deregulation, and the limited role of government (Antonio, 2007). Here 
it is important to distinguish scholarship that views neoliberalism as an ideological 
project from scholarship that is more centrally focused on understanding its changing 
institutional practices.10 While neoliberalism has changed the "idea" of the state 
(Bourdieu, Wacquant, & Farage, 1994) it has also shifted the institutional practices 
associated with the state (Hall & Soskice, 2001; Krippner, 2007). 
Successful states are increasingly fostering ties to industry and associated actors to 
help drive economic development. These ties between state and society, referred to as 
7 For an in-depth analysis of the IMF see (Stiglitz, 2002). For an overview on the various and sometimes 
contradictory usages of the term "Washington Consensus" see (Williamson, 2000). 
This incoherence is due to its advocates' tendency to incorporate elements of other theories into its own 
theoretical doctrine (Peck, 2004). 
9 Market fundamentalism refers to the idea that society should be "subordinated to a system of self-
regulating markets" (Somers & Block, 2005). 
10 For an overview of scholarship on neoliberal as an ideological project versus those more concerned with 
its changing institutional practices see (Krippner, 2007). 
11 
embeddedness, are a central feature of development (Breznitz, 2007; Evans, 1995; 
O'Riain, 2000, 2004; Pingle, 1999). Developmental states range from the developmental 
bureaucratic state (DBS), associated with the industrial success of the East Asian 
economies, to decentralized developmental networked state (DNS), defined by their 
ability to nurture local and global technology and business networks (O'Riain, 2000)." 
DNS states represent a diverse range of cases that include Ireland, Israel, Taiwan 
(O'Riain, 2000, p. 186), the United States (Block, 2008; Block & Keller, 2011), and 
China (Appelbaum, Parker, Cao, & Gereffi, 2011).12 The diversity in cases also reflects a 
recognition that forms of state embeddeness vary, leading to industrial systems that have 
differing strengths, weaknesses, and ties to the global market place (Breznitz, 2007). This 
body of work also advances an understanding of the amorphous and unfixed boundaries 
of the state and its associated institutions (Jessop, 1990). This underscores a shift to new 
state practices that rely on quasi-state institutions and industries for development and 
implementation. 
Much of the existing scholarship focusing on the influence of neoliberalism on state 
practices tends to focus on privatization and deregulation. The focus on deregulation as a 
key component of neoliberalism is problematic, however, because it obscures the current 
practices of states in two specific ways. First, while deregulation suggests that states exit 
deregulated industries, it is more accurate to refer to reregulation where states continue to 
be involved in regulating the industry, but in different ways (Majone, 1990). Second, 
11 See (Block, 2008; O'Riain, 2004) for the distinction between the DBS and the DNS. The DBS model 
allowed East Asian economies to move up into higher value electronics manufacturing through industry 
incentives and the state's ability to discipline capital in accordance with state planning. India aspired to be a 
DBS state, but largely failed in its ability to induce and discipline capital to act according to the state's 
industrial plans and in achieving its stated developmental goals (Chibber, 2004). 
12 China is not an exclusively top down developmental state model. Rather, it combines government 
agencies, market forces, input from scientific and professional communities (Appelbaum, et al., 2011, p. 
225). 
12 
Public Private Partnerships (PPP) are an increasingly dominant strategy of development 
in countries that lack the capital, resources, expertise, and capabilities to implement 
development projects. These partnerships extend Evans's observation that the state needs 
business as a source of decentralized knowledge about what is possible and as 
implementers of developmental projects (Evans, 1997, p. 70). Traditionally, the goal of 
these partnerships was to provide infrastructure (e.g, transportation, power, and 
communications), but the scope of these partnerships are broadening to include new 
domains of the state, such as design of educational policy and the construction of new 
universities. 
The "varieties of capitalism" literature sheds some light on the relationship 
between the state and market, yet still does not fully account for the role trade 
associations play in engaging the state. From the perspective of this literature, firms are 
conceived of as major actors and business associations are acknowledged to play a 
coordinating role between the state and society. In this respect this literature shares some 
similarities with state-society approaches, which suggest that market economies are 
embedded within a civil society that is both structured by and helps to structure the state 
(Block & Evans, 2005). On this account, civil society includes a variety of 
nongovernmental associations such as trade associations, social movements, and political 
parties (Habermas, 1989). The "varieties of capitalism" literature, however, exaggerates 
the role of the employer along two dimensions. First, while states may adopt certain 
neoliberal policies favored by employers, states may also initiate the adoption of an 
expanded scope for decentralized decision making and invite private actors to participate 
in policy making decisions (Howell, 2006). Second, employers are characterized by 
13 
internal divisions that may make consensus difficult to reach (Cowhey & Richards, 2006; 
J. D. Levy, 2006) and therefore collective action difficult to initiate or sustain. Sector 
specific industry trade associations, where consensus is easier to produce relative to 
umbrella associations, may offer a mechanism for employer coordination in this regard. 
Yet, the "varieties of capitalism" literature fails to show the potential depth of the role 
these civil society actors may play in setting the agenda of the state, designing state 
industrial policies, and ultimately taking over state responsibilities. Trade associations, 
with frequent interaction with the government and a degree of autonomy from the 
demands of everyday business activities, may have the capacity to sustain interaction 
with governmental actors over a longer period than firms alone. These organizations may 
be even more influential in upgrading in developing countries, since developing countries 
tend to have weaker institutions and less coherent state governments than their developed 
country counterparts. ~ 
The rise of India's ITES service points to a model of development that is driven 
by private and quasi-state actors that lead industrial upgrading, policy formation, the 
creation of new skills, industry training, and capabilities for ITES development. This 
does not mean, however, that the state was absent or uninvolved in skill and knowledge 
development, industrial policy, and sector formation. In fact, the state was instrumental in 
creating the initial knowledge base for the emergence of the IT and ITES industries 
through investments in education, drafting early industry policies that helped support an 
emerging sector, such as exemptions on hardware import taxes and revenue taxes on 
software and service exports, creation of communication infrastructure and dedicated 
13 Even coherent Weberian bureaucracies in developing countries may be undermined by bureaucratic rule 
following, producing a less coherent state (Chibber, 2002). 
14 
technology industrial parks, as well as coordinating with and implementing industry and 
trade associations' recommendations. 
The current approach to industrialization in India constitutes a hybrid model of 
development: firms and trade associations in partnership with the state emerged as the 
central actors leading industrial upgrading. The Indian model of development changed 
over time from an aspiring developmental state characterized by autarky (Chibber, 2004; 
Evans, 1995) toward a more decentralized and flexible developmental state that relies 
upon close cooperation with firms to identify and support strategic sectors and 
innovations. In this way, the Indian state failed to approximate the centralized 
developmental bureaucratic state (DBS) associated with the industrial success of the East 
Asian economies, and toward a state more similar to a decentralized developmental 
networked state (DNS). 
The shift in India's state strategy toward development began in the 1980s when 
the Indian state began to slowly reform (Chibber, 2004; Evans, 1995; Kohli, 2004; 
Panagariya, 2008; Pingle, 1999). The reform process advanced unevenly across industrial 
sectors, agencies, and states. The Indian IT sector, the government agencies responsible 
for promoting IT growth, and leading state governments, were on the cutting edge of 
these reforms and best exemplify the Indian state's new approach to development. This 
change in India's approach to development was part of a broader shift in government 
away from an import substituting industrialization (ISI) model of development and 
socialist orientation characterized by self reliance and an antagonistic relationship to 
business, toward one that emphasized an increased focus on exports and a more business 
15 
friendly orientation.14 Yet, it is a mistake to view this shift simply as becoming more 
business friendly; it was a new way of doing business in India, one that involved new 
partners, pursuing new capabilities. 
Under the "traditional" state-based approach, the Indian state was instrumental in 
creating the initial knowledge base for the emergence and upgrading of the IT and ITES 
industry in India. The Indian state was the key initial actor in creating the knowledge base 
for late industrialization through the development of institutions of higher education 
capable of producing high numbers of technical talent. Despite the fact that the top end of 
the Indian higher educational system produced world-class technical talent, the system 
failed to generate a sufficient quantity of high quality graduates to meet the country's 
growing industrial needs staring in the 1980s. In addition, the best and brightest graduates 
produced by the Indian educational system tended to leave the country though a process 
of "brain drain" that has only begun to reverse in the early 2000s (Saxenian, 2006). 
The Indian state was also important in establishing one of the first software 
policies in the developing world in the early 1970s, although a coherent industrial policy 
focused on software promotion and development only emerged in the 1980s (Heeks, 
1996). The software policies from the 1980s onwards were fine-tuned by the involvement 
of private industry and association involvement and beginning in the 1990s were 
broadened to apply to the emerging ITES industries. Therefore, state actions in education 
and industrial policy were necessary, yet insufficient factors explaining the rise of the 
ITES industry and subsequent industrial upgrading. 
The hybrid model of development through which firms and trade associations 
emerged as central actors (in partnership with the state), leading later stage industrial 
14 For more explanation on India's ISI orientation see Chibber (2004) and Pingle (1999). 
16 
upgrading, was prompted by shifting institutional arrangements. Some of these 
institutional shifts were not specific to India, but constrain an array of states' abilities to 
use a bureaucratic developmental state strategy to pursue future development. For 
example, international trade agreements constrained states from protecting fledgling 
strategic industries through trade protectionism in manufacturing and service industries 
(Wade, 2003).15 Some developmental states, such as Korea and Japan, had trouble 
adapting to decentralized industry structures and shifts in financial markets, as became 
evident during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis (O'Riain, 2000). 
Other institutional changes affected India specifically. The Indian state's role as 
the "License Raj," characterized by high levels of regulation, reached its zenith in the 
mid-1970s. This regulatory approach, in particular, hindered the growth of small and 
medium sized businesses that lacked the resources and political connections to navigate 
the system (Chibber, 2004). Beginning in the early to mid-1980s the Indian state began to 
adopt a more congenial attitude toward business and began to work more cooperatively 
with them on industrial development. The state shift in orientation was due to the slow 
liberalization of government policy that began under Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in the 
mid-1980s (Kohli, 2004), the collapse of the USSR, which hitherto provided India with a 
developmental model and a counterweight to neoliberal hegemony, and India's 1991 
balance of a trade crisis that prompted the government to accelerate the structural reforms 
that were already underway. This shift allowed industry trade associations and private 
firms emerging during the 1980s to slowly have more leadership and control over 
industrial development. 
15 TRIMS and GATS limited developing state governments' ability to constrain companies operating in 
their territory (See Wade, 2003). 
17 
A central findings of this dissertation is that trade associations, moving beyond 
playing a coordinating role with the state, may become quasi-state actors that lead policy 
formation and implementation in select areas traditionally viewed as state 
responsibilities, such as education and industrial cluster development. In an era of 
globalization and neoliberalism, developing market economies have increasingly turned 
toward decentralized developmental governance models that more explicitly rely upon a 
variety of civil society actors. Through trade associations, firm level practices in training 
(technical, industry, and cultural skills) are "pulled-up," aggregated, and disseminated to 
policy makers to shape the future industry policy agenda. 
IV. Inter-firm learning and knowledge transfer 
The global value chain (GVC) and the "varieties of capitalism" literature 
demonstrate that firm-to-firm interactions, especially through supplier networks, are an 
important source of industry learning (Gereffi, 2005; Hall & Soskice, 2001). Moreover, 
this work suggests that skills upgrading is particularly important for firms attempting to 
move into higher value activities (Gereffi, 1999). In turn, sustained interaction through 
supplier networks leads to knowledge transfer, predominately flowing from firms based 
in more developed regions to firms in less developed regions.16 AnnaLee Saxenian 
(2006) found that US educated immigrant engineers transferred technology "know-how" 
that enabled their countries of origin develop strategic industries. Yet, mediating factors, 
such as dependence on clients and professional associations, can place limits on the rate 
and height of upgrading. The extent to which particular tasks assigned to offshore firms 
16 This literature also recognizes that participation in trade networks may lead some trading partners to 
decline relative to others (Hopkins and Wallerstein, 1986; Gereffi and Kozeniewicz, 1994). As a result, 
trade alone may not improve a firm or country's position in the international division of labor. 
18 
are integrated with client business processes and systems shape the degree of 
coordination and learning firms obtain from their clients. In medical services, it is the 
authority of professions to create labor monopolies over designated tasks through 
credentialism, thereby excluding some workers, that determines if clients are a significant 
source of firm learning. Based on the interaction between these mechanisms and 
mediating factors, knowledge transfer through "reverse" migration results in a faster rate 
of upgrading, while occupational groups, such as professional associations may place 
limits on the growth and scalability of professional services in developing countries, 
despite access to the requisite technical skills. These finding have implications for policy 
incentives for development. 
V. Knowledge creation and firm-led employee upgrading 
The developmental literature acknowledges the role of internal firm processes; it is 
often to highlight the barriers to industry and national development created thorough firm 
efforts to retain proprietary, firm-specific knowledge (Amsden, 2001). However, firms 
are also recognized to be a source of decentralized knowledge and implementers of 
development projects for the state (Evans, 1997), as well as sources of knowledge 
creation and skills training within the labor force. The varieties of capitalism literature 
highlights the sphere of vocational training and education as central areas where firms 
must develop relationships with various actors to resolve coordination problems in the 
area of job skills (Hall & Soskice, 2001, p. 7). Based on the cases described in this study, 
firms emerge as key agents in creating knowledge and skills through intensive training 
and the establishment of corporate universities. Firm-level training upgrades and 
19 
complements employee level skills and knowledge acquired through the educational 
system. In particular, firms developed three types of knowledge. First, corporate training 
programs develop technical knowledge in particular domains, such as interpretive skill in 
radiology or the ability to create mathematical models in financial services. Second, firms 
develop industry knowledge by providing lessons on historic and evolving industry 
trends. Third, firms provide cultural and soft skills training in order to develop interactive 
skills to be used in interactive service delivery. 
VI. Cultural labor and skills 
Extending Amsden's framework on knowledge-based assets, I argue that cultural 
skills are an important, yet neglected, component of the knowledge-based asset concept. 
In order to extend Amsden's framework I draw upon three additional strands of work; 
cultural sociology, the sociology of work, and post-colonial theory. Cultural sociology 
has been instrumental in identifying how culture shapes skills as individuals respond to 
their external environment (Bourdieu, 1977; Swidler, 1986). Bourdieu's concept of 
habitus provides insight into culturally-based skills by explaining how individuals within 
a given culture share an understanding of the tacit "rules of the game" (Bourdieu & 
Wacquant, 1992). Swidler's "tool kit" model of culture offers a complementary 
perspective to Bourdieu, defining culture is a resource, or a repertoire of skills that directs 
individuals' action (Swidler, 1986, 2001). Skills provide the major link between culture 
and action and are composed of "habits, practices, and other 'cultured capacities,' such as 
intuitive capacities for perception and judgment, that have to be learned and that people 
20 
can't perform with confidence unless they get reasonably good at them" (Swidler, 2008, 
p. 616). 
Cultural skills are particularly important in the trade of services because service 
work is interaction intensive, difficult to measure, and the production of a service cannot 
be separated from its consumption. Conversely, manufactured commodities can be 
produced to fit design specifications, measured to assess product conformity to product 
design, and then stored in inventory. In services, this process is more difficult because 
service quality requires more subjective interpretation and production and consumption 
are more tightly linked. Ultimately, service quality is what the customer says it is. 
Services are provided through interpersonal interaction that is shaped by one's 
socialization and cultural expectations. Therefore, the manner in which services are 
provided shapes the perception of the quality of that service. As a result, a key capability 
in delivering services across cultural boundaries is the adaptation of the provider to the 
cultural expectations of their client. I describe this management of cultural repertoire as 
the performance of cultural labor. Cultural labor is embodied in the individual employee; 
aggregated, it is an important capability that determines upgrading success in the IT 
enables services. 
The cultural labor concept takes a sociological approach to skills being historical 
situated in broader relations of power and enduring colonial relations between the 
developed and developing. The colonial system perpetuated binary conceptions between 
East and West, noting that they were "constitutive;" one could not occur without the 
other (Said, 1979). The concept of "cultural labor" is a micro-level analysis of the skills 
required in cross-cultural business. The analysis follows Homi Bhabha's observation 
21 
where colonialism was never to liberate natives, but rather to reproduce the colonized as 
almost the same but not quite/white (Bhabha, 1994). The cultural skills valued within the 
IT and ITES industry, and the training practices that produce those skills, must be also 
viewed within broader historical relations, rooted in colonialism. The training programs 
build cultural skills based upon generalizations of how Indian workers behave. Yet, it is 
dangerous and inaccurate to perpetuate stereotyped impressions of heterogeneous groups 
(Spivak, 1988). The perpetuation of Indian culture characterized by a "culture of 
deference" (Nadeem, 2011) is one example of how essentializing characterizations are 
identified and eliminated through training programs. These practices demonstrate how 
the very skills valued in the ITES industry are relational and constructed by relations of 
power. 
VII. Design & Case Selection 
In order to understand the implications of this shift toward services the category 
of "services" needs to be further disaggregated. There are two main reasons for this 
disaggregation. First, industrial upgrading occurs when there is a move from low-value to 
high-value work and this often occurs within a narrow industry category. An example of 
this is a move from low-value assembly to high-value design work within technology 
manufacturing (Gereffi, 1999). Second, the broad industrial category of "services" is 
notoriously difficult to define because it is a residual category used to refer to any 
activities that are not agriculture, mining, or manufacturing (Banga, 2005a; Dossani & 
Kenney, 2006). The heterogeneity of services makes theorizing about service upgrading 
exceedingly difficult. To focus the dissertation theoretically I focus on services that can 
22 
be fulfilled remotely through information, Internet, and telephony technologies; 
commonly referred to as IT enabled services (ITES) by industry insiders, policy analysts, 
and government officials. 
The ITES industry itself contains a wide variety of activities that range from back 
office (data-entry, transaction processing, technical support); sales and customer care 
departments (call centers), to professional services (such as legal, radiology, and 
accounting). This study compares the skills required in two knowledge intensive 
professional service industries: financial and medical services. It is these higher-level 
skills that are most important for India's ability to retain a long-term advantage in 
services, which is critical to sustained economic development in the country. I selected 
the financial and medical ITES industries based upon their different propensities to 
specialize within industries and expand in breadth across industries, thereby addressing 
the twin dimensions of industrial upgrading, scope and depth. Medical services contribute 
to a greater degree of specialized industry learning since these services are niche products 
and they require specialized skills. Conversely, financial services are generic and show 
more potential to expand in breadth by producing services that are used by multiple 
industries. 
The financial services industry is one of the most monetarily significant arenas 
within the Indian ITES service industry, accounting for 40 percent of the total $4.6 billion 
gross revenues generated in the country's service sector (NASSCOM, 2006a). The size of 
the medical services export industry is more difficult to measure because industry 
statistics are difficult to separate from general hospital services and there are a number of 
medical services business associations unevenly distributed across the industry. Medical 
23 
transcription was one of the first services to be offshored to India in the early 1990s and 
the business has grown in revenue to USD 220-240 million (NASSCOM, 2006c). 
Professional radiological services, on the other side of the skill continuum, offer an 
"extreme" case 7 of offshoring because of the high degree of technical knowledge 
required combined with the potentially harmful effects of making mistakes, which can 
result in misdiagnosis of life threatening conditions (F. Levy & Yu, 2006). 
This study produces detailed case analyses of four firms. Case-based research 
strategies are particularly well suited in helping a researcher retain the holistic 
characteristics of events, such as organizational and managerial processes (Yin, 2002). 
Cases also regularly imply analytical generalizations and they can serve as the foundation 
of theory formation (Weiss, 1994). The firms selected for this study were chosen for their 
longevity and their market leadership in the knowledge process outsourcing industry (See 
Table 1.2: Summary View of Medical Service Firm & Table 1.3: Summary View of 
Financial Service Firm). The firms Infosys and Evalueserve specialize in financial 
services. Teleradiology Solutions and the Global Radiology Centre (GRC) are firms that 
specialize in radiological services. Infosys, founded in 1981, is a top 10 IT and ITES 
firms in India in terms of revenue (Dataquest, 2010), has over 100,000 employees 
worldwide, and is perhaps the firm most closely identified with India's IT and ITES 
revolution. While the majority of Infosys' revenue is derived from software services, the 
company's acquisition of leading Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) firm Progeon in 
2006 positioned Infosys as a top ten leader in IT enabled services (Dataquest, 2010) and 
later in knowledge process outsourcing services. Evalueserve, on the other hand, was one 
17 Radiology is an "extreme" case in terms of its skill and educational demands, relative to the low-skill, 
back office work that dominated offshore outsourcing in India in its early years. 
24 
of the first "pure" knowledge process outsourcing firms; indeed, the firm coined the term 
in order to differentiate its "knowledge intensive" services from the lower skill level call 
center and data entry work that defined the early years of offshore services in India. 
Evalueserve was founded in 2000 and has over 2200 employees working on various 
services, including investment and patent research. Financial services generate 70 percent 
of revenue in Infosys's knowledge services division and 40 percent of the total revenue 
for Evalueserve (personal interviews, Infosys, 11/23/07 & Evalueserve, 12/3/08). 
International teleradiology is a relatively small niche service industry and the 
Global Radiology Center (GRC) and Teleradiology Solutions are the longest running 
firms providing these services from India (Chandran, 2008). The GRC was founded in 
2002 as a joint venture between top 10 IT and ITES company, Wipro, and a regional 
hospital group, Manipal Hospitals, and has approximately 22 employees. Teleradiology 
Solutions was founded in 2001 and has approximately 350 employees. Evalueserve and 
Teleradiology Solutions focus on slightly more specialized services relative to Infosys 
and GRC. The former firms were traditional start-ups, while the Infosys knowledge 
services division and the GRC were either acquired or incubated by established IT firms 
looking to diversify into new lucrative service lines. 
VIII. Method 
This analysis will draw upon three types of primary source data (interviews, 
observation, and documents) as well as secondary sources in order to explain the 
processes at work leading to industrial upgrading into knowledge intensive service 
delivery. Of these, the interviews provide the core foundation of the data collection 
25 
strategy. The dissertation draws upon 101 semi-structured interviews collected during 14 
months of field research in India, conducted between July 2006 and May 2009 as well as 
subsequent follow up phone interviews. Interviews targeted Indian executives, managers, 
workers, employee development training staff, governmental and trade association 
officials, clients, and western executives responsible for offshoring operations at 
multinational companies. The study also draws upon ethnographic observations gathered 
1 Q 
during visits to dedicated training facilities, industry policy meetings, and industry trade 
events and conferences. 
The research also draws upon primary source documents from the Government of 
India, trade associations, newspapers, trade publications and magazines, as well as 
secondary sources in order to complement and corroborate interviews data where 
possible. I focused my investigation on 5 news sources (International sources: The New 
York Times, BBC.co.uk; Indian sources: The Hindu, The.Times of India, and The Deccan 
Herald,) using key search terms and electronic alerts. 
I also performed follow up interviews and searches in newspapers, after the 
emergence of the global financial crisis in September 2008. The destabilization of the 
global financial system and the collapse of investment banks that bought financial 
services from Indian companies raised concerns over the long-term sustainability of 
offshore outsourcing concentrated in financial services. In the short-term, financial 
executives responded to the uncertain economic climate by delaying purchases and 
service commitments, causing sales to drop for many Indian companies that provided 
these services. Overall, the broader ITES industry growth, dominated by lower value 
18 The GRC does not have a dedicated training facility because of its small size and reliance on a one-on-
one training model, although some "soft-skills" and management trainings are offered through Wipro, the 
parent organization. 
26 
back office services, stagnated during the crisis and then quickly rebounded. Growth in 
the higher-value KPO sector dipped causing analysts to revise revenue growth forecasts 
in India from 16.7 billion in 2010-11 to 17 billion in 2013-14 (Aggarwal, 2010a). The 
reason was that many firms were fighting to survive and lower-value cost cutting BPO 
services could help companies cut costs, after they moved beyond the initial fear of 
approving new deals in the face of such economic uncertainty. KPO services on the other 
hand are typically value-adding activities that provide additional analysis of data and are 
used to help guide future company strategy. Value adding activities were simply not on 
the agenda for many companies in survival mode. 
IX. Plan of the Dissertation 
In the dissertation that follows I provide a brief overview of the Indian state's 
post-Independence developmental trajectory. This history is briefly sketched in Chapter 2 
"The Indian Developmental State: Interventions in IT& Higher Education Policy." In this 
chapter I analyze the state's successes and failures in building a knowledge base for 
industry development through an analysis of the Indian higher educational system and 
key industrial policies that helped the sector emerge and upgrade. In Chapter 3, "In 
Partnership with the State," I analyze the evolving role industry trade associations' play 
fostering development in the Indian IT and ITES industry. This new arrangement is 
helping to address some of the limitations of the Indian state, such as the under 
production of skilled workers in the higher education system relative to industrial needs. 
In Chapter 4, "Skill Upgrading through Client Relationships & Migration of Technical 
19 Neither Infosys nor Evalueserve had banking customers who failed (i.e. Lehman Brothers), although they 
were affected by the overall market turmoil that lowered short-term industry growth rates across the board 
in the banking and financial services sector. 
27 
Labor" I analyze the organizational practices that transfer knowledge from developed 
countries to service providers in India. I uncover two central mechanisms, one that 
transfers knowledge through client relationships and another that occurs through the 
migration of technical labor. Chapter 5, "Firm Training Programs: The Construction of 
Upgrading in Offshore Service Companies" focuses on the ways in which firm training 
programs upgrade worker skills and build firm knowledge. Simultaneously these efforts 
shape the perceptions of firm capabilities, thereby highlighting the constructed nature of 
skill upgrading. In Chapter 6,1 shift the analysis from the meso-industrial level of 
analysis to the micro foundations of India's industrial upgrading story, with a particular 
focus on the new cultural capabilities embodied in the worker. I argue, the performance 
of "cultural labor" is imperative to firm success in the international trade of services. I 
conclude (Chapter 7) by arguing that the new institutional arrangement guiding 
development, led by industry associations in partnership with the state, in the IT and 
ITES industry is emblematic of India's new approach to development and is being 
replicated unevenly across other industrial sectors in India and in other developing 
country contexts. In the conclusion I also assess how the mechanisms identified here can 
inform policy and the opportunities other developing countries have in replicating India's 
ITES industrial strategy. 
28 
Table 1.2: Summary View of Medical Service Firms 
Industry 
Medical 
Less Specialized* 
Global Radiology Center 
(Wipro + Manipal Hospital) 
Origin/Type: 
Incubation (est. in 2002) 
between business house, Wipro 
(est. 1945. IT: 1980), and 
Manipal Group (est. 1990). 
Employees: 22 total, 5 Indian 
certified doctors and 4+ full time 
technologists 
Focus on 3-D Imaging for US 
Market. Provide Indian certified 
radiologists for 3-D imaging, 
which are more highly educated 
and less expensive on average 
than technologists used in US. 
Also provide interpretations of 
images for Singapore based 
clients using Indian radiologists 
(less than 20% of revenue). 
Model: IT service company, 
Wipro, partnered with Manipal 
Hospital, in a revenue sharing 
model that combines the 
management and delivery skills 
with technical expertise of 
respective organizations. 
More Specialized 
Teleradioloev Solutions 
Origin/Type: 
Entrepreneurial firm (est. 2002) 
Employees: 350 total, 13+ US board 
certified doctors 
Focus on top value services: "reporting" 
or reads of scans by qualified US Board 
Certified radiologists working overseas. 
Also deliver 3D work, clinical trails, and 
other service lines to US, Singapore, and 
Indian markets. 
Model: began as a Yale faculty / US 
Board certified radiologists (ABR) 
performing radiology reads from house 
in India. Grew business over time, hiring 
additional US board certified 
radiologists - wherever they may live -
to provide diagnostic interpretations for 
US clients through secure technology 
network. 
* Specialization is defined in terms of the degree of interpretation and customization required for work. If 
work tends to be more routinized, less tailored and customized, it is therefore less specialized. The degree 
of industry skill and knowledge tends to increase specialization. 
29 
Table 1.3: Summary View of Financial Service Firms 
Industry 
Finance 
Less Specialized 
Infosys BPO, Knowledge 
Services Division 
Origin/Type: 
Acquisition (Progeon est. 2002, 
acquired by Infosys 2006) by 
leading IT firm (Infosys est. 
1981). Knowledge service work 
started in 2005. 
• 1000+highly skilled 
professionals, including 
Chartered Accountants, 
MBAs, engineers, 
statisticians and economics 
graduates 
• Focus: Large, process 
oriented engagements that 
build upon firm's core IT 
and BPO business. 
Model - grew out of BPO 
processes into higher-level work 
as client's confidence in skills 
increased. 
More Specialized 
Evalueserve 
Origin/Type: 
Entrepreneurial firm (est. 2000) 
• Largest KPO in world 
• 2200 highly skilled professionals 
MBAs, Chartered Accountants, 
PhDs, and lawyers. 
• Focus: Small, specialized/ 
customized engagements. Provides 
a range of custom research, data 
analytics and Intellectual Property 
and Legal Process Services 
Financial Services 
• Asset Management 
• Private Equity 
• Investment Research 
• Retail Banking 
• Insurance 
Model - Highly customized research & 
consulting work that provides 70-80% of 
tasks traditional performed by 
investment bank/ consulting companies. 
30 
Chapter 2 
The Aspiring Developmental State 
/. Introduction 
The Indian state has slowly shifted development strategies from a developmental 
state led-model to one that is more fragmented and industry led. This shift began to 
unfold during the early to mid-1980s, with an opening up of policy reforms, but was 
accelerated and coordinated through the help of trade associations beginning in 1988. 
Even as these changes have taken place, the initial role of the Indian state and the 
continued role of the state in partnership with trade associations and other entities remain 
important to an overall understanding of Indian development. In the context of the shifts 
described above, this chapter will focus on the role the state played in establishing the 
industrial knowledge base, policy coordination, and support for subsequent upgrading. 
According to Peter Evans (1995), Indian development in IT was characterized by 
a lack of public-private coordination. While this describes the state-industry relationship 
until the early 1980s, this began to change to such an extent during the 1980s and 1990s 
that by 2000 industry and trade associations were key actors in IT and ITES industry 
policy and, by mid-2000s Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) were becoming the preferred 
developmental model. These initiatives were increasingly coordinated and driven through 
trade associations. There are two underlying factors that caused this change. First, there 
was a shift in the role of the state from autarky to embeddedness in civil society, which is 
characterized by close ties to the business community (Evans, 1995). Second, was the rise 
31 
and consolidation of the industry association, the National Associations of Software and 
Service Companies (NASSCOM), to speak and act on behalf of the industry. 
Contrary to popular and industry perception, the Indian state helped to support the 
emergence of the country's software and services industries. The commonly repeated 
narrative by IT and ITES insiders is that the industry developed, not because of 
government support, but in spite of it. This narrative, however, neglects three important 
factors that helped the industry emerge, grow, and eventually upgrade to higher value 
services. The first was the significant investments the state made in building educational 
institutions that provided the IT industry with the educational foundation to enable 
growth and subsequent upgrading. The second oversight is the actual IT policies and 
programs that the Indian state implemented beginning in 1972 that helped the IT and 
ITES industries take off and upgrade. Third, it neglects the intervention the state made to 
discourage continued market dominance by foreign MNCs, best exemplified by the exit 
of IBM in 1978, which provided emerging domestic producers the opportunity to develop 
without being overrun by foreign competitors in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
This chapter provides an overview of key economic, political and institutional 
developments in India contributing to the rise of the ITES industry. First, I analyze the 
macro-context for the Indian development state since Independence, highlighting along 
the way key industrial policy initiatives that helped the IT and ITES industries grow. 
Second, I focus on state formation of a higher educational system that provides the 
foundation for IT and ITES industry development. In doing so, I challenge 3 commonly 
held assumptions about development in India. These assumptions are: 
20 For arguments that highlight the role of the state played in supporting the emergence of the IT industry 
see (Evans, 1995;Heeks, 1996;Pingle, 1999) 
32 
1. The economic turnaround of the Indian economy (as measured by GDP) was the 
result of economic liberalization. I find instead that a shift in the role of the state 
was more important, and predated, the large economic reforms of the 1990s. 
2. The software and ITES industries flourished precisely because the state was 
uninvolved in these industries. I find that, in fact, the state implemented a 1972 IT 
policy and became increasingly involved in promoting the software industry and 
the ITES industry that followed, due to is interaction with industry. 
3. The higher education system is responsible for India's success OR its failure. I 
find that the answer is somewhere in the middle of these two extremes. The state 
initiated educational system provided a foundation for industry development, but 
that base was insufficient to meet growing industry demands and the government 
required new efforts and policies, with the help of industry, to meet growing 
industry needs. 
Given these three challenges to popular and academic narrative of India's IT and ITES 
industry development, this chapter challenges claims that ITES industries flourished 
because of state lack of involvement. Instead, I provide evidence that the state was not 
only involved, but its involvement was key to the take-off and maturation of the sector. 
Yet, the state alone was unable to meet the industry's evolving needs, requiring various 
forms of industry input. (Chapter 3 provides a closer examination of the new actors that 
assisted the state in this process). First, I turn to the economic and political history in 
order to provide the institutional context for further analysis of the IT enabled service 
33 
industry. Then I survey the expansion of the higher educational system, with a particular 
eye toward the interaction of the state and non-state actors in educational policy reform 
and the creation of new technical intuitions. 
//. Shifting roles of the Indian Developmental State 
At the time of independence, India sought to become a self-sufficient 
developmental state. Yet, the state's attempts to achieve its own developmental goals 
failed (Bagchi, 2000; Chibber, 2004; Herring, 1999) or met with mixed results (Evans, 
1995). The general conclusion in the literature is that the Indian state is committed to 
planning, yet too democratic, soft and embedded to govern the market (Herring, 1999). 
Yet, this characterization fits a specific historical period when India's "Hindu rate of 
growth" averaged between 3 and 4 percent, prior to its economic turnaround in the mid-
1980s. 
In subsequent years India experienced a dramatic economic turnaround. Its 
broader economic growth rates of 6 percent or higher since the late 1980s and since the 
early 1990s the rates have ranged between 6 to nearly 9 percent of GDP (Panagariya, 
2008). These high growth rates have made a visible impact on the country, particularly in 
urban centers where commerce and development are most highly concentrated. The 
economic reforms that followed India's balance of payment crisis in 1990-91 are offered 
as a common sense explanation for India's economic turnaround, but some scholars have 
challenged this assertion (DeLong, 2003; Kohli, 2004; Panagariya, 2008).21 The 
antecedents of this dynamic shift in overall economic performance require further 
scrutiny. In order to highlight the political and economic developments that shaped 
21 For an overview of the debates on the causes and effect of Indian economic reform refer to (Corbridge & 
Harriss, 2000; Joshi & Little, 1996). 
34 
overall industrialization since independence, I will use the economic penodization and 
growth rate estimates provided by Panaganya (2008), which are provided in Table 2.1 
and Tables 2.2 below. 
Table 2.1: State Roles and Associated Growth Rate 
State Role 
Emergent Developmental State 
License Raj State 
Pro-Business State Attitude 
Association Led Developmental State 
Year Range 
1951-1965 
1965-1981 
1981-1988 
1988-2006 
Growth Rate % 
4.1 
3.2 
4.8 
6.3 
6 -* 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1951-1965 1965-1981 
Emergent > License Raj State 
Developmental > 
State 
1981-1988 1988-2006 
Pro-Business Association Led 
State Attitude Developmental 
i State 
Table 2.2: Bar Graph of State Roles and Associated Growth Rate. 
X-axis is the economic and political phase of growth with corresponding date range. The 
Y-axis is growth rate percentage based on price adjusted GDP. Source: Based on 
calculations in (Panagariya, 2008, p. 7). 
35 
I argue that the state's role shifted in response to internal and external constraints, 
which shaped the four distinct economic outcomes provided in the graph above. Each 
role was characterized by a distinctive approach to development and different economic 
outcomes. I characterize the varying roles of the state over specific periods of time as: 
The Emergent Developmental State (1947 to 1965); The "License Raj" State (1965-
1981); Pro-Business State Attitude (1981-1988); and the Association Led Developmental 
State (1988-2010).221 will describe each of these state roles below, concentrating most 
heavily upon the latter stages, which most directly affect upgrading in the IT and ITES 
sectors that is the focus of this dissertation. This analysis of the Association Led 
Developmental State will continue in Chapter 3, which focuses on developmental role 
trade associations play in industry growth and upgrading. 
/. The Emergent Developmental State (1947 to 1965) 
The Emergent Developmental State, which lasted from Independence in 1947 to 
1964, was characterized by the state's desire to become self-sufficient in the wake of 
colonial domination. This self-sufficiency was sought through an import substitution 
industrialization (ISI) developmental strategy and state investments in strategic industries 
and in education. Despite the state's inability to create a "strong developmental state" 
during this early period (Chibber, 2004), the newly independent Indian state achieved 
self-sufficiency and industrial diversification during its first three industrial plans (1951-
66)(Rudolph & Rudolph, 1987). This period achieved an average annual growth rate of 
4.1 percent (Panagariya, 2008). Most significantly for later development, state action 
" Although Panagariya's calculations stop at 2006,1 am extending the period associated with the 
Association Led Developmental State role to 2010, since growth rates from 2006-2010 were in excess of 
the average 6.3% associated with this period and the state role has become even more reliant on industry 
associations. 
36 
during this period led to deepening of India's industrial and technical base (Chibber, 
2004). 
During this period, the state created a number of state-owned enterprises that 
helped develop technical manufacturing industries in cities that would later become IT 
hubs. In particular, the establishment of large public sector units in Bangalore by the state 
helped develop an emerging technical talent pool in the area that would foster subsequent 
industry development (Personal Interview, Secretary to Karnataka Government, 
11/15/07). The key public sector units headquartered in Bangalore include Hindustan 
Aeronautical, Ltd. (HAL) (established in 1940); Hindustan Machine Tools, Ltd. (HMT) 
(1953); Bharat Electronics, Ltd. (BEL) (1954); and Bharat Earth Movers, Ltd. (BEML) 
(1964). The concentration of state owned enterprises, along with the creation of leading 
universities in the Bangalore area (such as the Indian Institute of Science) helps explain 
how Bangalore, in a less than a generation, was transformed from a relatively small city, 
known as "a pensioner's paradise," into India's "Silicon Valley." Bangalore became a 
thriving IT and ITES hub city of 5.7 million commanding half of the state's gross 
domestic product income derived from the services sector (Business India Intelligence, 
2011). One of the major developmental accomplishments of the state during this period 
was the educational system, which provided a base for subsequent industrial growth and 
upgrading. I describe the state's interventions in the higher educational field in greater 
detail in the second half of this chapter. 
ii. The "License Raj" State (1965-1981) 
This period is most strongly associated with the leadership of Indira Gandhi 
(1966-1977), the suspension of India Democracy (i.e. "Emergency") from 1975-77, and 
the peak of government regulatory control of industry. During this period the State 
37 
viewed the business community as an object to be controlled rather than supported and 
promoted. This gave way to onerous regulations that made it difficult for many firms to 
operate. Licensing for industrial entry or expansion was first established under the 
"Industrial Development and Regulation Act of 1951" and substantially expanded under 
"The 1969 Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act." The MRTP 
attempted to reserve licenses for small and public sector producers and make it more 
difficult for large companies to enter certain industries (Heeks, 1996). But the regulation 
regime actually had the unintended consequence of harming small-scale businesses more 
than large-scale business, since the latter had the resources and the political ties required 
to bribe bureaucrats and circumnavigate bureaucratic rules (Chibber, 2004). Despite 
regulatory difficulties for businesses, the roots of the current economic success in the IT 
and ITES industry can be traced to this period. The government implemented policies 
that provided Indian firms with an opportunity to enter the IT market. It was during this 
period that the government of India first identified IT as a sector worthy of government 
support, crafted an IT policy, and limited foreign MNC dominance in the IT market; this 
allowed some of the leading IT companies to emerge in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
These developments are discussed in greater detail under Section III on IT policy and 
firm emergence in this chapter. 
Hi. Pro-Business State Attitude (1981-1988) 
I argue that a key explanation for the rise in economic prosperity in India was a 
change in the role of the state to become more pro-business during the 1980s. This 
explanation runs counter to neoliberal explanations that emphasize a roll back of the 
state, through far reaching liberalization market reforms, which are credited with helping 
38 
India to move away from its "Hindu rate of growth." One exuberant commentator 
providing such an account says, 
[,..]in July 1991[...] with the announcement of sweeping liberalization [...][W]e 
felt as though our second independence had arrived: we were going to be free 
from a rapacious and domineering state... (Das, 2002, p. x). 
Tarun Das, the Director General for 30 years of the national business association, the 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), also credited the 1991 liberalization reforms with 
India's economic growth in an interview with Thomas Friedman: 
'Our Berlin Wall fell,' said Das, 'and it was like unleashing a caged tiger. Trade 
controls were abolished. We were always at 3 percent growth, the so-called Hindu 
rate of growth—slow, cautious, and conservative. To make [better returns], you 
had to go to America. Well, three years later [after the 1991 reforms] we were at 7 
percent rate of growth (Friedman 2005, p. 50). 
Explanations of this kind are overdrawn and fail to grasp both the timing and cause of 
India's economic growth and the scope of reform. Social scientists have highlighted the 
fact that India's economic turnaround occurred well before the bigger and more visible 
reforms during the 1990s (DeLong, 2003; Kohli, 2004; Panagariya, 2008). These 
accounts suggest that the policy officials' ideological shifts toward more "business 
friendly" approaches to governance did more than the actual economic policy changes to 
spur higher economic growth rates. This argument follows Rodrik and Subramanian's 
distinction between "premarket" and "probusiness" orientations, where the former 
focuses on removing impediments to markets through economic liberalization, which 
favor new entrants and consumers, and the latter with focuses on raising the profitability 
of the established industrial and commercial establishments, favoring incumbents and 
producers (Rodrik & Subramanian, 2005, p. 195).23 In a similar vein, Atul Kohli argues 
23 Other scholars who credit the shifting attitude of the state for the economic growth of the 1980s, rather 
than simply economic liberalization include (DeLong, 2003; Kohli, 2004). This argument runs counter to 
39 
that the left leaning officially socialist state experienced a "pro-business drift" beginning 
in the 1980s that helped produce more cohesive state policy, but he attributes this change 
to the state's decline in multiclass representation, rather than neoliberal policy reform 
(Kohli, 2004, p. 278). This shift by the state during the mid-1980s encouraged, rather 
than discouraged, entrepreneurial activities and promoted integration into the world 
economy, leading to a belief that the "rules of the game" had changed (DeLong, 2003). 
The marked effects of these shifts in state policy undercut the neoliberal explanation of 
India's growth as being produced by reforms to minimize government intervention in the 
market. 
The increasingly pro-business stance of the Indian state began under Indira 
Gandhi's return to power (1980-1984), but is most strongly associated with the leadership 
of her son Rajiv Gandhi (1984-1989).24 His government implemented policy reforms that 
encouraged capital-goods imports, relaxed industrial regulations and rationalized the tax 
system (DeLong, 2003). Policy liberalizations in the area of state control included 
delicensing of entry in some industries, reduction in the scope of MRTP Act, greater 
leeway in firm expansion without license renewal, a greater degree of flexibility in 
producing alternative products without license renewals, reduction of price controls on 
some goods, and lowering of corporate taxes (Heeks, 1996, p. 36). Yet, the reforms 
tended toward reduction of governmental oversight and regulation, rather than the 
removal of governmental oversight and regulation as neoliberalism would suggest. 
iv. Association Led Developmental State (1988-2010) 
the arguments of economists who attribute liberalization reform, rather than a change in state attitude, as 
explanations for growth. See Panagariya (2008) and (Srinivasan, 2005). 
24 For a more nuanced rendering of the three phases within Rajiv Gandhi's administration see (Kohli, 1989) 
40 
During this period the state continued to build ties with industry, giving its agents 
more autonomy and authority over the developmental process. However, changes in 
state-society relations occurred unevenly across industrial sectors. Factors contributing to 
this variance in state action by industry are average firm size, the strength of the trade 
associations, the industries export orientation and potential, and the presence of unions. 
The IT and ITES industries were more prone to cooperative ties to the state than other, 
domestically oriented manufacturing industries. This was because the software and 
services industry in India is dominated by small, resource poor firms that are strongly 
export oriented, with a cohesive and proactive trade association with linkages to the state 
(Pingle, 1999), and has no sizeable organized union. The state's continued move to the 
right and its embrace of economic liberalization, which is particularly pronounced in the 
software and service industry, does not mean that the state was uninvolved in promoting 
this sector. It just took on an increasingly supporting role in the development process. 
There are number of state policies that have helped the sector grow over time. For 
example, the state passed legislation that provided a number of financial incentives, 
including state tax exemptions on profits from software exports, discounted rates on 
utilities for firms, and infrastructure improvements of special export processing zones 
dedicated for the industry in IT hub cities (NASSCOM, 2006a; Pingle, 1999). The sector 
has also actively and increasingly engaged government. Over time, these relations have 
become formalized into Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) replicated across industries 
and developmental projects; trade associations, as I discuss in Chapter 3, play a key role 
in forging industry relationships with the state. PPPs were also facilitated the 
development of new industrial facilities and the creation of new technical colleges. These 
41 
projects are also discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3. 
///. Policy Frameworks and the Emergence of Firms 
The Indian state created IT policies and programs that helped the Indian software 
industry grow and upgrade over time. The policy framework emerged in a patchwork 
manner, incoherent during the 1970s and 1980s, but was increasingly refined during the 
1990s, as the state worked more cooperatively with industry and its associations. India 
has had a software policy since 1972, longer than any other developing country (Heeks, 
1996, p. 25; Parthasarathi & Joseph, 2004). 
i. The Development of India's IT Policies 
The Department of Electronics (DoE), founded in the 1972, was responsible for the 
software industry and software industrial policy. That same year the DoE launched the 
"Software Export Scheme" policy, which provided software exporters an exemption from 
paying import tariffs on IT hardware if the computers were used for the development of 
software for export markets. In order to qualify for the duty exemption the importer 
needed to commit to earning the import price of the computer in foreign exchange 
through software exports within a five-year period.25 This law was first used in 1974 and 
benefitted early software companies, such as Tata Consulting Services (TCS) and 
Infosys. Prior to 1980, however, most software companies were using the "Software 
Export Scheme" to lease computer equipment for domestic use, rather than the 
production of software for exports (Heeks, 1996, p. 43). The state attempted to 
discourage these practices through adjustments to the policy, such as increasing the 
minimum threshold of export revenue generated, but its success was mixed at best. The 
25 The commitment was later raised to twice the import price (Heeks, 1996, p. 42). 
42 
policy efforts made during the 1970s helped build a foundation for the software industry, 
but more sustained and coherent software industrial policy only emerged in 1985 when 
software was identified as a thrust area by the government (Heeks, 1996, p. 25) (See 
Table 2.5: Major Milestones and Events in Indian IT Industry). This lack of focus of the 
government on software policy was due in part to the biases of the state toward hardware 
manufacturing and toward the domestic, rather than the export market. 
State promotion of and intervention into the software industry, however, operated 
within a broader Indian industrial policy orientation that privileged domestic producers 
over foreign producers. The overall import substitution industrialization (ISI) model of 
development, which guided industrialization within India, also influenced state 
intervention in the electronics industry. The recommendation of the Bhabha Committee 
Report on Electronics (Government of India, 1966) prompted the state to shift electronics 
production away from foreign firms toward domestic ones and to upgrade technology in 
the state. Policy makers viewed multinational hardware manufacturers as taking 
advantage of India and dominating industry during the 1960s. With this in mind and the 
subsequent Bhabha Report recommendations, the state focused attention on getting the 
wholly owned multinational subsidiaries to dilute their equity by passing Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), in 1973, which required all foreign firms to dilute 
their equity (Evans, 1995; Pingle, 1999). Yet the complete domination of MNCs in the 
Indian market made enforcement difficult for the state and firms, such as IBM, were able 
to resist state regulation for a number of years (Heeks, 1996, p. 55). The peak in 
government control of the computer industry lasted from 1976 to 1978 (Heeks, 1996, 56), 
which coincides with the peak in regulatory role of the "License Raj" state. 
43 
During the 1980s Rajiv Gandhi began to repair ties with the broader business 
community, which were harmed during the License Raj period, and with the IT sector 
specifically. Rajiv Gandhi was a proponent of IT and sought to promote the sector and 
technology within the country more generally. It was during this period that Indian policy 
in IT shifted toward a promotional role. The state began to put together the institutional 
framework to more substantively support industry (Evans, 1995). The more 
comprehensive software policy implemented in 1986 was a crucial component of this 
shift. The policy delinked the software industry from the hardware sector. Previous 
policies grouped hardware and software together, despite their different market 
orientations, industry maturities, and requirements. 
A crucial policy identified by industry insiders and scholars that enabled 
industry's emergence and later growth was the creation of infrastructure and export 
processing free trade zones set up exclusively for software and service companies. 6 In 
1988 a Software Technology Parks (STP) of India Scheme was established under the 
Department of Electronics. The STP initiative provides a number of tax exemptions, such 
as a 100% income tax exemption on export income during the first 5 years of operation, a 
50% exemption thereafter, and exemptions from central and state sales and service taxes 
(Software Technology Parks of India, 2011). The STP scheme was passed during a the 
more Pro-business orientation of the state, but was only implemented 3 years later, after 
gaining some additional input from industry and its association. 
The STP scheme was not an absence of government intervention, but rather an 
intensification of government involvement to support industry. The Software Technology 
26 Multiple industry executives at Infosys and Evalueserve and government officials at STPI, and state and 
federal departments. Also see (Athreye, 2005; Kennedy & Sharma, 2009) 
44 
Parks of India (STPI) was an agency established by the government in 1991 in order to 
implement the STP Scheme and expand the initiative in regional hubs across the country. 
A crucial government service provided by STPI was the provisioning of communication 
infrastructure, such as data communication infrastructure, bandwidth, and satellites, 
which were particularly difficult for companies to obtain even as late as the early 2000s. 
Another role STPI played beginning in 1991 was coordinating with other state agencies 
in order to provide a "single window clearance." STPI, in conjunction with state IT 
departments, helped facilitate interaction with government agencies and departments, 
such as the customs department, labor department, industries department, sales tax 
authority department, and airport authorities (personal interviews, government official, 
Department of IT, Karnataka, 11/12/07; Director, STPI-Bangalore, 11/7/08). While, some 
industry members complained, even as late as 2008, that in practice their was no "single 
window;" firms still had to coordinate with multiple governmental agencies (Executive, 
Infosys, 12/10/08), STPI still helped to streamline the approval and coordination process 
to make it less onerous and lengthy. By 2006 procuring business data lines and Internet 
access in the metropolitan areas became easier for firms less and STPI shifted its focus to 
incubation services targeting small start up businesses with fully equipped office suites 
and connections to venture capital funders (Director, STPI-Bangalore, 11/7/08). STPI 
also helped provide other services like technology assessment and professional training to 
support operations. The STPI services provided by the government show an extension of 
the arms of the state into civil society in order to support business needs, rather than a 
pulling back or roll back of the state. 
45 
During the 1990s state governments joined the central government in enacting IT 
policies in order to promote software. The focus generally was on key issues of 
infrastructure, electronic governance, IT education and provision of a facilitating 
environment (Parthasarathi & Joseph, 2004). Additional IT policies and government 
promotional initiatives, such as abolition of entry barriers for foreign companies, 
telecommunications and Internet infrastructure improvements, reductions of taxes, duties, 
and tariffs are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3. 
ii. The Emergency of Industry 
A quarter of the top 20 IT firms in 2010 were established or began operations in 
India during the "License Raj" period. The firms that were founded in 1981 or before 
were Tata Consulting Services (TCS) (1968), HCL Infosystems (1976), Patni Computer 
Systems (1978), Wipro (1980), Infosys (1981), and Microsoft (India)(1981) (See Table 
2.3: Top 20 IT and ITES Firms with Operations in India). Infosys, Patni, and HCL were 
pure start up companies that began with a small number of employees. Patni and Infosys 
had 5 or fewer employees when founded. TCS is part of the larger Tata Group, founded 
in 1868 and Wipro was an small investment house that started as vegetable oil company 
in 1945; both were part of larger diversified companies that later moved into IT toward 
the end of the License Raj period. 
46 
Table 2.3: Top 20 IT and ITES Firms with Operations in India 
2010 Top 20 IT Firms in India 
Rank 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Firm 
Tata Consulting 
Services (TCS) 
Wipro 
Infosys Technologies 
Hewlett-Packard (India) 
Cognizant Technology 
Solutions 
IBM (India)*** 
HCL Infosystems 
HCL Technologies 
Ingram Micro (India) 
Redington India 
Oracle India 
Cisco Systems (India) 
Dell (India) 
Intel (India) 
Accenture India 
Tech Mahindra 
SAP (India) 
MphasiS 
Microsoft (India) 
Patni Computer Systems 
Began 
IT 
work* 
1968 
1980 
1981 
1989 
1994 
1992 
1976 
1991 
1996 
1993 
1993 
1995 
2000 
1988 
1987 
1986 
1996 
1992 
1981 
1978 
2010 Top 20 BPO Firms in India 
Rank 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Firm 
Genpact 
TCS BPO 
Wipro BPO 
Aegis BPO**** 
WNS Global 
Services 
Firstsource 
Solutions 
IBM Daksh 
Aditya Birla Minacs 
Infosys BPO 
Accenture (India) 
HCL BPO 
EXL Services 
Xchanging India 
Cognizant 
Convergys India 
3i Infotech 
Intelenet Global 
Hinduja Global 
Solutions 
24/7 Customer 
MphasiS BPO 
Began 
ITES 
work** 
1997 
2004 
2000 
1985 
1996 
2001 
1999 
1999 
1991 
2000 
2001 
1999 
2001 
1994 
2001 
1999 
2000 
1995 
2000 
2000 
Source: Dataquest 2010 
Notes: 
Bold denotes ownership overlap between top ITES and IT firms. The considerable overlap among 
market leaders between these two industry segments underscores the difficulty in analytically 
separating ITES from the IT industry. 
*Date reflects when company began IT services in India. Founding date may be an earlier date. 
**Year organization began providing BPO services or date of key BPO firm acquisition, unless 
otherwise noted. 
***IBM operated within India from 1963-1978, but left due to Government pressure to divest. 
****Date refers to incorporation date, rather than the date BPO delivery began. That later date could 
not be found. 
A notable exception in Table 2.3, however, is the case of IBM. IBM began 
operations in India in the mid-1960s, but left in 1978 when the company refused to 
47 
comply with the 1973 FERA regulations, which required all foreign firms to dilute their 
equity (Evans, 1995; Pingle, 1999). The government of India wanted to stimulate 
domestic production of an IT industry and sought self-reliance that was consistent with 
its broader ISI developmental strategy at the time. The departure of IBM from India in 
1978, however, provided a market opening for domestic producers, which seized the 
opportunity to develop in the technology arena without the pressures of foreign 
domination in the domestic market. According to Wipro CEO, Azim Premji, IBM's 
departure gave India an opportunity to develop its own firms and technologies: 
I think it [IBM's exit] gave us a huge opportunity. And I think it benefitted the 
Indian industry and population enormously because IBM at that time was not 
bringing in current technology. That was a bone of contention between them and 
the government of India in the late 70s. And when they exited - because they 
believed at the time that the world cannot exist without IBM and they had a 
dominant market share in India - it opened up a huge opportunity for Indian 
companies to really strike out. It opened a huge market for us to identify a 
position in this market, which we could create a uniqueness for (Rose, 2006, 
minutes 1:59 - 2:48 on audio program). 
The fact that Premji cites the exit of IBM from India as providing the opportunity to local 
firms is important to note, particularly because the company's exit was due to 
government regulatory and protectionists policies. In essence, Premji is crediting 
government protectionist policies with providing domestic producers the opportunity to 
grow in the IT sector. Contra the neoliberal explanation of growth, it was in fact 
government protection that gave early domestic firms the chance to flourish. 
IV. In Pursuit of Saraswati: Culture, Status, and Knowledge in India 
The foregoing analysis of government policy helps to shed light on how the 
Indian state has in fact played a critical role in fuelling the development of the IT 
48 
industry. In addition to the policy frameworks described above, the state also plays a role 
in developing knowledge through education. In this section, I explore the context within 
which the state's higher education initiatives, discussed in section V, have emerged. The 
development of India's knowledge base cannot be explained by state initiatives to grow 
educational institutions in the country alone. Instead, the values associated with 
knowledge in India play an important role in this process. Both the cultural values and 
status associated with knowledge, particularly in certain fields, have played an important 
role in fostering the development of knowledge in the country. 
At a broad cultural level, reverence of education is celebrated in the Hindu 
religion. Saraswati is the goddess of knowledge and Hindu citizens across the country 
97 
pay homage to her through religious rituals. The devotion and respect also extends itself 
to other symbols of knowledge and learning, the most notable of which are books, which 
are to be kept clean, off the floor, and never touched with the feet, which are dirty and a 
sign of disrespect. In particular, the country places a strong value on technical education 
and technical degrees. The technical areas most highly sought after are within the 
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics fields (STEM). Of these, 
engineering is the most popular and it is widely considered the highest status profession 
in India. This is reflected in the selectivity rating for top engineering colleges relative to 
other fields. The high status of technical education is even evident in the marriage 
market. Engineers tend to be highly sought on the marriage market in newspaper 
advertisements, and on popular marriage websites, such as shaadi.com. After 
Independence civil engineering was the most popular engineering specialty. With the rise 
271 do not intend to suggest that all Indian Hindus value education nor do I suggest that non-Hindus de-
value education. I am simply calling attention to the ways knowledge has deeper cultural roots in the 
nation. 
49 
of IT industries this interest shifted toward computer engineering, which surpassed civil 
engineering as the most competitive subspecialty. 
The status and prestige attributed to science and math education in India stands in 
contrast to those emphasized in the U.S., where many students gravitate away from 
28 
STEM subjects. According to an Evalueserve executive, "here [in the US] if you study 
science and math you are called 'geeks,' but in India you are called a smart guy . . . you 
are getting marriage proposals" (personal interview, Evalueserve Executive, 5/22/09). 
The executive expanded upon this contrast by pointing to the negative effect of American 
students' peer groups, who often frown upon those who wanted to pursue interests in the 
science and math fields, including women (personal interview, Evalueserve, Executive, 
5/22/09). 
Other Indian industry executives have commented that the reason why India has 
become such a popular sourcing destination for companies is because the country has the 
raw production of technical talent that the US lacks. The cultural value of knowledge in 
technical fields has contributed to the emphasis on these fields in education and the 
availability of talent in India. According to Wipro CEO, Azim Premji, "education in 
American has never emphasized math at a primary level, while in India it has always 
emphasized that" (Rose, 2007). The Premji elaborated that technical fields are very 
popular in India because students are pushed to excel in them, because of the cultural 
value attributed to them, and they are motivated to achieve in these fields because they 
provide the best career options, which is particularly compelling in a developing country 
context (Rose, 2007). 
28 U.S. President Obama's efforts to reinvigorate interest in science and technology fields and rekindle a 
"Sputnik" moment when American student's gravitated toward science fields in the 1960s speaks to this 
trend. See Obama's State of the Union address, January 2011. 
50 
V. Higher Education and the Development of the IT Industry 
Although the cultural foundation that places value on knowledge is an important 
component of India's successes, it alone is not enough. India would not have become the 
developing country leader in IT and ITES services without the state's creation of a high 
quality higher education system capable of providing high numbers of technical talent. 
State intervention was critical in building a foundational knowledge base that provided 
the intellectual capital for subsequent industrialization. The state has been fairly 
successful in generating a top-tier of the higher education system that is capable of 
serving the needs of industry, producing high quality employable talent. The state's 
success in education must be qualified in two ways. First, the strengths of the educational 
system do not sufficiently extend beyond the top tier, leaving a gap in the labor supply 
available to firms. Second, the country has failed to generate widespread literacy and 
primary education, which deeply constrains the supply of students that reach the higher 
educational system. 
Despite the recognized strength of the very top tier of higher education a broad 
consensus stretching across academia, industry and government has emerged that India 
needs educational reform (Agarwal, 2006; Bhagwati, 1993; Debroy, 2008; Government 
of India, 2002, 2007a; National Knowledge Commission, 2007; Pitroda, 2008). The 
country's primary problem in higher education has been its inability to produce a 
sufficient quantity of quality graduates to meet its own industrial needs. Only about 10 
percent of university age students are attending university, while in many other 
developing countries this figure is closer to 20 to 25 percent (Debroy, 2008). The middle 
51 
to low end of the education system fails to meet the country's industrial needs, despite 
high labor demand (Agarwal, 2006; Panagariya, 2008). The lack of a sufficient labor 
supply with higher education degrees, particularly in technical fields, such as engineering 
and computer science, is reflected in overall wage inflation (Panagariya, 2008). Specific 
problems with the higher educational system, as it relates to the IT and ITES industry, 
include too few quality teachers and institutions, outdated equipment and curriculum, a 
lack of real world problem solving skills, creative thinking skills, interactive skills, and 
cross-cultural sensitivity. 
Second, the state's relative success in higher education needs to be viewed 
alongside its general failure in achieving universal literacy and widespread primary 
education. The Indian government itself has called this "one of the most disappointing 
aspects of our developmental strategy," with net attendance in primary level education an 
unacceptably low 66 percent (Government of India, 2002, section 3.57). India's adult 
literacy rate is also 66 percent.29 The unwillingness of the state to legislate compulsory 
primary level education in India, which is seen as oppressive toward the poor who 
depend on child labor for survival, helps to explain the state's failure to spread primary 
education (Weiner, 1991). However, the broader state bias toward tertiary education over 
primary education has roots in the colonial state, which emphasized higher education 
over primary education and literacy in order to create a cadre of Indians capable of 
assisting the British Raj in the administration of the colony. After Independence the elitist 
political leadership in charge of the state, who had received education under the British 
Adult literacy rate is defined as a percentage of persons aged 15 and over who can read and write 
(UNICEF, 2003-2008). There is variation across states in terms of literacy rates, with the state of Kerala 
achieving near universal literacy levels (Sen. 2000). 
52 
Raj, also privileged higher education in an effort to industrialize quickly (D'Costa, 2005, 
p. 59). 
Below I identify three major periods in the growth of higher education. These 
three periods roughly map on to the 4 shifting roles of the state identified above, although 
the first two periods are collapsed into one period; this difference in organization reflects 
the state's dominance and success in establishing higher education prior to the 1980s. 
/. The Foundation of Higher Education: 1947-1980 
The Indian state began creating higher educational institutions immediately in the 
post-independence period. These efforts built upon the educational infrastructure that the 
British created to develop its Indian administrative cadre. Prior to independence there 
were twenty universities and 500 colleges (Panagariya, 2008). This number climbed to 
110 universities and 6963 colleges in 1980 (Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
2010b). However, the apex in quality education in India is classified as "Institutions of 
National Importance," which until the late 1990s were almost exclusively government 
institutions. The India government helped set up the Indian Institutes of Technology 
during the 1950s and 1960s, which were designated as "Institutions of National 
Importance" under The Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 (see education timeline 
below). In 1961 the first Indian Institute of Management was founded in Calcutta, which 
produced among the best management and finance professionals in the country. Despite 
the technical skills base built through state efforts, additional efforts were needed to keep 
pace with surging education demand. 
53 
ii. Surging educational demand and enrollments: The Rise of Private Colleges: 
1980-2000 
The 1980s saw a surge in demand for industry relevant higher education skills, 
which the state was unprepared to meet (Agarwal, 2006). This situation, along with the 
more business friendly orientation of the state during this period, prompted the state to 
allow private enterprise into the arena of higher education. During the 1990s educational 
demand increased based on growing industry, a rising middle class that increasingly had 
the means to send more children to higher education. Private institutions met much of this 
increased demand in higher education (Agarwal, 2006). This trend toward private 
institutions was particularly pronounced with private engineering colleges, especially in 
southern states, such as Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad, and Tamil Nadu. The 
inability of the state to build colleges and universities quickly enough to meet rising 
industry demand along with deficiencies in quality of graduates produced by the middle 
to lower levels of higher education lead to a tightening labor market. By the end of the 
1990s the situation reached a crisis point. In 1989-99, due to the shortage of engineers in 
the face of dramatic increases in demand for skilled labor, the government declared a 
state of "educational emergency" (Athreye, 2005). By 2000 India had established 254 
universities and 10152 colleges (Ministry of Human Resource Development, 2010b). 
According to an Infosys Executive who claimed he has been active in educational 
reform for 15 years, "if not for private entrepreneurs in technical education, engineering, 
we would not have been able to get the people we got" (personal interview, Infosys, 
12/10/08). However, despite the rise in the production of raw technical graduates, many 
private institutions were still unable to produce high quality labor. A new collaboration 
between the state and industry sought to increase technical labor at this high quality level. 
54 
In the late 1990s two technical universities, modeled to approximate the rigor of 
Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT), were established that would serve as a guide for 
later efforts to scale technical education in the state. These two institutions were the 
Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT)-Hyderabad in Andhra Pradesh 
(founded in 1998) and IIIT-Bangalore in Karnataka (founded in 1999). Both of these 
universities were established as National Public Private Partnerships (NPPP) with 
financial and administrative governance support provided by both Government of India 
and the IT industry (Ministry of Human Resource Development, 2010a). However, their 
were some proto-PPP educational models in India that also served as models, such as the 
Indian Institute of Science (1909) and the Indian Institute of Management Calcutta (1961) 
that were universities of national importance that were established through private and 
state collaborations. The Indian Institute of Science, also known as the "Tata Institute," 
was founded with money from Jamsetiji Tata, of the Tata Business House, and the 
government. The first Indian Institute of Management in Calcutta was a joint venture 
with the Government of India in collaboration with Alfred P. Sloan School of 
Management (MIT), the Government of West Bengal, The Ford Foundation, and Indian 
industry. 
Hi. Scaling Higher Education through Public Private Partnerships: 2000-2010 
At the turn of the century the Indian government increasingly prioritized higher 
educational reform, vowing to increase the quantity and quality of graduates, in response 
to growing demands from industry, and the government's own recognition of the need to 
increase the supply of labor. The India Vision 2020 Report identifies employment and 
education as the key thrust areas for India's future economic growth and specified 
knowledge, rather than capital, as "the most important determinant of development" 
55 
(Gupta, 2002, p. 22). The government also recognized the problems in higher education. 
The Tenth Year-Five Year government plan recognized the importance of IT and ITES to 
the country, but lamented the fall in the quality of higher education in the country: 
The University and Higher Education Sector also needs attention. . . it is a matter 
of serious concern that the expansion in quantity has been accompanied by a fall 
in quality (Government of India, 2002, p. 38). 
The Tenth Year-Five Year Plan identified higher education as needing attention, 
especially in the area of curriculum and examinations reform (Government of India, 
2002). The Plan also recognized that the private sector would play an increasing role in 
education government called for the modernization of laws, rules, and procedures to 
enable private individuals and organizations to set up universities colleges and schools 
(Government of India, 2002, p. 2). During this period there was a big increase in the 
number of technical and management institutions, primarily due to private initiatives. 
The National Knowledge Commission was established in June 13th, 2005 as a 
high level advisory committee to the Prime Minster of India on educational reform. Prime 
Minister Manmohan Singh declared, "The time has come to create a second wave of 
institution building and of excellence in the field of education, research and capability 
building so that we are better prepared for the 21st century" (Speech at the launch of the 
Knowledge Commission, New Delhi, 8/2/05). In particular, the Commission was given a 
"mandate to guide policy and direct reforms, focusing on certain key areas such as 
education, science and technology, agriculture, industry, e-governance etc" (Government 
of India, 2010, p. 39). 
The panel was composed of eight members, including government officials, 
academics, and industry executives. Industry representation and leadership were 
56 
dominated by the IT industry, however, with two-thirds of industry representation from 
IT industry and the Chairman of the Commission Sam Pitroda, a leading 
telecommunications professional who also advised Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi on 
telecommunications liberalization in the 1980s. The second IT executive on the 
Commission was Nandan Nilekani, who was then Infosys' CEO and also previously co-
founded industry association NASSCOM. The organization NASSCOM also participated 
actively in the process, providing industry recommendations, shaping the overall form of 
the plans proposed. (Chapter 3 will provide more insight into how this organization 
influenced industry policy with the state). One of the key recommendations coming from 
the panel was a massive expansion of educational institutions. The panel suggested 
building around 1500 universities nationwide, which would increase India's enrollment 
ratio to at least 15 percent (National Knowledge Commission, 2007; Pitroda, 2008). 
Pitroda and other scholars also identified major problems facing higher education, which 
included the format and frequency of examinations, which test memory rather than 
understanding; failure to adapt curricula over time; inadequate research and learning 
infrastructure, such as libraries, research labs, and Internet connectivity; rising property 
prices, which have inhibited the growth of universities; and the fact that teachers 
compensation hasn't kept up with the cost of living (Guha, 2008; Pitroda, 2008). 
Policy was created based on the recommendations above and the government's 
increased recognition of the problems facing higher education. Industry was the major 
driving force behind these efforts. The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-08 to 2011-12) 
stressed, among other things, an emphasis on building higher level technical and 
57 
professional education to support the development of technical education and the IT and 
ITES industries specifically. In the Eleventh Plan it said, 
For India to fully capitalize on the opportunity and sustain its present lead in the 
global IT/ITES space, there is a need to focus on skill development to enhance the 
talent pool advantage, strengthening infrastructure to lower the transaction costs 
of business; and improve the domestic regulatory provisions (Government of 
India, 2007b, p. 274). 
Quality improvement in higher education was initiated through restructuring academic 
programs to ensure their relevance to modern market demands. There are moves toward a 
complete revamping of teaching and learning methods, moving away from instruction 
and rote learning toward interactive processes that encourage creativity and innovation 
and are based on compulsory seminar-tutorials (Government of India, 2010, p. 36). 
The Eleventh Five Year Plan proposed to help meet industry needs by scaling the 
number of higher education institutions. India had 9653 universities and 18,482 colleges 
in 2008 (Ministry of Human Resource Development, 2010b). Specifically the Plan 
proposed to establishment of eight new Indian Institute of Technology, seven new Indian 
Institutes of Managements, ten new National Institutes of Technology, three Indian 
Institutes of Science Education and Research, twenty Indian Institute of Informational 
Technology, and two new School of Planning and Architecture (Government of India, 
2007a) (See Table 2.4: Establishment of New Central Higher Education Institutions). The 
document also states, "the scope for PPPs will be explored" in establishing these 
institutions (Government of India, 2007a). NASSCOM, the trade association for the IT 
and ITES industry drafted the plans for the creation of the IIITs (NASSCOM, 2008) that 
were later adopted by the government of India (Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, 2010a). What is particularly noteworthy about this process is how the PPP 
58 
model went from being an experiment to an explicit policy approach for the government 
of India. This exemplifies the shift in the state's role away from autarky toward a state 
willingness to follow industry's lead. This ambitious planning process to radically 
increase the number of technical institutions demonstrates the increasingly complex 
social initiatives that are being created through the PPP model. It also shows how the 
state continues to be involved, alongside private actors, in the development planning 
process. 
Table 2.4: Establishment of New Central Higher Education Institutions 
Types of Institution 
Central Universities 
Indian Institute of Technology 
National Institute of 
Technology 
Indian Institute of Informational 
Technology 
Indian Institute of Science 
Education and Research 
Indian Institutes of Management 
School of Planning and 
Architecture 
N 
Existing at the end 
of Tenth Plan 
(3/13/2007) 
19 
7 
20 
4 
2 
6 
1 
umbers 
Additional Institutions 
proposed during 
Eleventh Plan (2007-
2012) 
16 (in uncovered states) & 
14 Innovation 
Universities* 
8 
10 
20 
3 
7 
2 
* 14 Innovation Universities aiming at world-class standards proposed across Tenth 
and Eleventh Plan Period. 
Source (Government of India, 2010, p. 28, Table 5.1) 
' NITs - National Institute of Technology (established through the National Institutes of Technology Act 
2007) (Government of India, 2010) 
59 
VI. Conclusion 
The development of the IT and ITES industries has been fueled by the Indian 
state, operating in partnership with other entities. Although neoliberal accounts of India's 
development have focused on the perceived "rollback" of the state, this chapter has 
highlighted numerous ways in which the state is indeed heavily involved in industry 
upgrading and its continued support of industrial development. Instead of withdrawing 
from the market in order to promote the industries success, the state has instead shifted its 
role over time. From its role as an aspiring "developmental state," to its role as an 
"industry-led state," the Indian state continues to be involved in development. The shifts 
in India's IT related policies demonstrate how the government played a key role in 
fostering the development of industry by protecting industry from foreign competition 
and imposing regulations that minimized the dominating presence of foreign companies. 
This protectionist policy made way for Indian innovation and industry development. 
Supported by a culture that values knowledge, the state has played a crucial role in the 
development of a higher educational system that has built the knowledge base for India's 
IT and ITES industries. However, the state's educational policy has not been 
unwaveringly successful, as the above analysis shows. Over time it has had to adapt to 
the gaps in its production of a skilled labor force. The increase of PPPs in the educational 
sector plays a key role in the state's response. 
This chapter has provided an overview of the shifting roles of the state throughout 
different periods of India's development. The chapter focuses in particular on higher 
education, where the importance of the state along with the growing importance of the 
private actors (particularly trade associations representing firms) is evident. The 
60 
following chapter takes a closer look at the role of these private actors and their 
partnerships with the state. 
61 
Table 2.5: Major Milestones and Events in Indian IT Industry 
1966 - Bhabha Committee Report on Electronics - seeks to build self-sufficient domestic 
electronics industry and upgrade technology in the state 
1969 - The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act limits licenses for 
large companies in an effort to protect small and public sector companies. 
1972 - Department of Electronics (DoE) founded. IT policy established. DoE implements 
"Software Export Scheme" allowing hardware to be imported for use in software 
export work on condition that the price of hardware was recouped within 5 years 
through foreign exchange earnings. 
1973 - Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) limited foreign equity in Indian firms 
to 40 percent unless the company was solely export oriented. Repealed in 1991 
reforms. 
1976 - Liberalization of policies related to software industry. Faster clearance of 
software export applications. Software could take advantage of export incentives 
including location in Export Processing Zones. Non-resident Indians were 
allowed to import software for purposes of export. Export obligation was 100% of 
all output produced. 
1976-1978 - peak in government control of the computer industry. 
1978 - IBM left India due to failure to comply with Government of India policies 
concerning foreign ownership liquidity (i.e. FERA) 
1981 - Software Export Policy: Import duties on hardware raised to encourage use of 
indigenous computers. Firms allowed to import hardware to write software for 
both domestic and export purposes. Software exporters could also import 'loaned' 
computers. 
1982 - DoE initiated a software export promotion policy 
1984 - New Computer Policy. Establishes software development promotion agency 
(SDPA) under the DoE. Import procedures simplified. Import duties on hardware 
reduced from 100% to 60% for software developers. Access to foreign exchange 
was made easier for software firms. Income tax exemption on net export earnings 
halved from 100% to 50%. 
1984 - Policy changes under Rajiv Gandhi prioritize IT sector for growth 
1985 - Texas Instruments sets up in Bangalore 
1986 - Software Policy: Indian government identifies education in software as a focal 
area and was "delinked" from the hardware industry in government policy. 
1987 - Infosys wins first international client 
1988 - NASSCOM founded 
1988 - Software Technology Parks (STPs) of India, Established under the Department of 
Electronics to encourage and support small software exporters, by giving 100% 
export-oriented firms a tax-free status for 5 years within the first 8 years of 
operation. Firms were provided with office space and computer equipment, access 
to high-speed satellite links and an uninterrupted supply of electricity. 
1991 - One-year waiver on income tax for software exports passed in government-
planning budget 
1991 - Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) agency established with objective to 
implement 1988 STP Scheme, set-up and manage communication infrastructure 
62 
facilities, coordinate government approval across multiple state agencies, and 
technology assessment and professional training services. 
1992-1995 - Import duties on imported software. Reduced to 20% on applications 
software and 65% on systems software in 1994. Reduced to 10% on both in 1995. 
1993-1999 - Income-tax exemptions: Software exports were exempt from income tax 
and this tax-free status was confirmed every year till 1995 after which it became 
open-ended. There is talk of ending this status in 2001. 
1994 - General Electric - establishes back office operations in India 
1996 - World Network Services (WNS), subsidiary handling British Airways, establishes 
back office ticketing services operations in India. 
1996 - American Express establishes back office operations in India 
1996-2000 - Migration of Indian Engineers peaks to developed countries to fix Y2K 
services, Increase of US HIB visas enable increased technical migration out of 
India 
1997 - Indian IT industry crossed $1 billion revenue mark 
. 1997-2001 - Peak of global Internet & Telecom boom 
2000 - Spectramind, first independent BPO firm founded in India 
2001 - 2003 - Global downturn in Internet & telecom industries 
2001 - Reduction of H-1B visas in US 
2001 - NASSCOM President Dewang Mehta dies 
2002 - Spectramind bought by large software firm Wipro 
2002 - Progeon, large BPO firm, acquired by Infosys 
2002 - By end of 2002 most major IT firms had acquired BPO service company (notable 
exception TCS - 2004) 
2005 - Large Indian firms pass $1 billion in revenue (TCS, Infosys, Wipro, etc) 
2005 - SEZ ACT 2005, Special Economic Zones 
2006 - NASSCOM begins Educational Initiative aimed at skills upgrading 
2008 - Global financial crisis (stagnant ITES growth rates, decline in KPO growth) 
2008 - NASSCOM submits Model DPR document on education to government 
2008 - Indian Government support of industry: IT Act Amendment, extension of tax 
incentives by a year, removal of the SEZ Act anomalies and the introduction of 
progressive telecom policies that focus on work from home. 
2010 - Government of India adopts aspects of NASSCOM education initiative 
63 
Table 2.6: Key Institutes of National Importance & Milestones in Higher Education 
1909 - Indian Institute of Science (IIS) in Bangalore established. Early PPP model 
founded with Private money under government supervision. 
1947 - Indian independence & Partition 
1951 - First Indian Institute of Technology inaugurated (IIT Kharagpur, 1951) 
1956 - Top medical college in India established, All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS) in Delhi 
1958 - Indian Institute of Technology Mumbai 
1959 - Indian Institute of Technology Chennai 
1959 - Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
1961 - The Institutes of Technology Act passed (GOI, 1961) 
1961 - First Indian Institute of Management Calcutta (IIM-C), Established by the 
Government of India in collaboration with Alfred P. Sloan School of Management 
(MIT), the Government of West Bengal, The Ford Foundation and Indian 
industry. Early PPP model. 
1961 - Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIM-A) 
1963 - Indian Institute of Technology Delhi (IIM-D) 
1973 - Indian Institute of Management Bangalore (IIM-B) 
1984 - Indian Institute of Management Lucknow (IIM-L) 
1986 - Government proposal to create four Indian Institutes of Information Technology 
(HIT), established only in 1998 
1994-IIT Guwahati 
1996 - Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode (IIM-K) 
1998 - first HIT established under PPP model. HIT (Hyderabad) 
1998 - Indian Institute of Management Indore 
1999- IIT (Bangalore) established under PPP model. 
2001-IIT Roorkee 
2005" Indian Institute of Management Shillong 
2008 - IIT Ropar 
2008 - IIT Bhubaneswar 
2008 - IIT Gandhinagar 
2008 - IIT Hyderabad 
2008 - IIT Patna 
2008 - IIT Jodhpur 
2009 - IIT Mandi 
2009 - IIT Indore 
2010 - IIM Ranchi 
2010-IIM Rohtak 
2010-IIM Raipur 
2012 - 11th Year Plan (GOI) establishes 7 new IIMs by the end of 2012. IIM Ranchi, IIM 
Rohtak, and IIM Raipur are already operational with IIM Tiruchirapalli scheduled 
to open in 2011 and IIM Jammu and Kashmir, IIM Rajasthan, IIM Uttrakhand 
scheduled (to be operational in 2012). 
64 
Chapter 3 
In Partnership with the State: Trade Associations' Role in Fostering Development 
in the Indian IT Industry 
/. Introduction 
How should developing states manage development in industries defined by high 
rates of innovation and change? The neoliberal answer to this question is that states 
should not attempt to do so. This view is based upon a belief in the self-regulating power 
of the market (i.e. market fundamentalism) and the need to restrict government 
involvement, which may interfere with this self-regulation. Instead, neoliberals suggest a 
"roll back" of the state that reduces state involvement in the market. On the other hand, 
critics of neoliberalism argue that states should play an active role in promoting 
development, suggesting that the achievements of developmental bureaucratic states 
T 1 
(DBS)" provide evidence of the efficacy states might have in promoting industrial 
development and raising the living standards of the population more generally.32 
Yet, in practice, neither complete roll back of the state nor adoption of the DBS 
model appears tenable today. The neoliberal strategy of state roll back is difficult (if not 
impossible) to achieve. Karl Polanyi's observation that states and markets historically 
evolved together and markets require the regulation that states provide (K. Polanyi, 2001 
31 The DBS is best exemplified by the economic success achieved by Japan and South Korea (O'Riain, 
2000). 
32 Refer to the following for the achievements of developmental states: (Amsden, 1989; Evans, 1995; Gold, 
1986; Johnson, 1982; Wade, 1990a) 
65 
[1944]) helps to illuminate the contradictions inherent in striving for markets without 
states. The practices of neoliberal states may paradoxically extend the reach of the state 
further into the market rather than minimizing its role. The most recent reminder of this 
fact is found in the 2008 global economic downturn: caused by risky investment practices 
within the U.S. financial community and a lack of institutional oversight, this crisis 
required unprecedented government intervention to stabilize the global economy. The 
alternative statist approach also presents challenges. This intensification of production 
networks spanning across borders has caused some country-focused development 
strategies to falter (Amsden, 1989; Johnson, 1982; Wade, 1990b). 
Yet, there are a number of institutional practices that states may adopt to offload 
key government responsibilities to quasi-state actors. These practices move beyond 
privatization and deregulation of key governmental services to include developmental 
partnerships between the state and private interests - Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs). 
However, the relationship between PPPs and neoliberal state practices in the context of 
developing states is under theorized/ Using a historical institutional approach, in this 
chapter I detail the rise of industry trade associations in first influencing and then later 
crafting key aspects of state industrial policy in India. This analysis will focus on the 
broadening role trade associations play in developing the Information Technology (IT) 
and IT enabled service (ITES) industries in India. 
This chapter is organized in four sections. In the following section, I briefly 
survey the literature on trade associations and their effect on industry development. Then, 
I offer a historical narrative of the expanding policy role of one Indian industry trade 
association, the National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM), 
33 For exception see (Brenner & Theodore, 2002; 2005, pp. 76-78) 
66 
as it and the IT and ITES industries have developed. The third section analyzes the 
developmental role that trade associations may play in state policy. This analysis emerges 
from an account of the changing role of NASSCOM in India, focusing in particular on its 
role in advancing educational reform and developing new industry "clusters." 
//. Trade Associations in India's IT and ITES Industries: Historical 
Development 
Previous work on trade associations tends to focus on their role as platforms for 
collective action and lobbying. However, there is an increasing recognition of the 
complementary effect trade associations can have in shaping development through its 
interaction with the state (Hall & Soskice, 2001; Maxfield & Schneider, 1997). Trade 
associations are voluntary, not-for-profit organizations composed of policy entrepreneurs 
within firms located in the same industry that seek to collect, share and disseminate 
industry relevant information and provide a platform for collective representation and 
lobbying (Lorenzoni & Lipparini, 1999; Streech & Schmitter, 1985; Tucker, 2008). 
Yet, mobilizing collectivly to advance common interests may be challenging 
(Olson, 1965). Three literatures offer influential accounts of the role of trade assocations. 
The literature on new institutional theory tends to view associations as agents of 
reproduction, rather than of change (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983; Oliver, 1997). 
Reproduction of conventions and values is carried out through the associational routines 
of "licensing, training, and professional development and the monitoring and disciplining 
of behavior" (Greenwood, Suddaby, & Hinings, 2002). The literature on innovation and 
cluster analysis goes a step further and recognizes trade associations' abilities to serve as 
67 
competitive assets that take "leading roles in the continuing upgrading of industry 
clusters," beyond mere lobbying organizations and social organizations.34 The 
developmental state literature refers to associations as facilitators in state-society 
relations (Evans, 1995; Pingle, 1999; Saxenian, 2000). This literature tends to 
characterize associational roles primarily in terms of the forum they provide for policy 
makers and industry leaders to interact and create state-society linkages (Evans, 1995; 
Pingle, 1999; Saxenian, 2000), although more recent studies found that patterns of action 
by business associations can directly affect actions taken by the state (Schneider, 2004; 
Sinha, 2005). 
Building upon these analyses, I argue that in some cases associations may move 
beyond influence and lobbying activities and become agents of change, in partnership 
with the state, particularly in select areas that affect their industry. Whereas the 
innovation and cluster analysis literature does not specify how associations serve as 
"competitive assets" nor how associations' may contribute to industrial development, I 
suggest that trade associations take up roles that include serving as brokers between 
various stakeholders, leading industrial policy formation, urban development planning, 
and securing public industry goods, such as educational reform. Finally, building on the 
developmental state literature, I suggest that trade associations may not just provide a 
forum for exchange between the state and industry to produce "embeddedness."35 They 
may also be understood as developmental actors in their own right, shaping, and at times, 
leading industry policy formation and implementation. Attention to these facets of trade 
34 "Clusters are geographic concentrations of interconnected companies, specialized suppliers, service 
providers, firms in related industries, and associated institutions (e.g., universities, standards agencies, trade 
associations) in a particular field that compete but also cooperate" (Porter, 2000, p. 15) 
15 Embeddedness refers to "a concrete set of connections that link the state intimately and aggressively to 
particular social groups with whom the state shares a joint project of transformation" (Evans, 1995, p. 59) 
68 
association roles sheds light on the role of the neoliberal state in the economy, 
particularly in developing economies. 
In this section, I illustrate the shifting institutional practices of the state under the 
influence of neoliberalism by offering a detailed examination of interactions between the 
Indian state and the NASSCOM, the sectorial industry association for the IT and ITES 
industries. The IT industry in India is an important location from which to study changes 
in state involvement in promoting industrial development and upgrading because industry 
success has occurred in spite of India's developmental state failures (Chibber, 2002, 
2004; Herring, 1999),36 which have been illustrated by low growth rates in many strategic 
industries, such as electronics and technology hardware, in the post-independence period. 
By studying the contrast between IT industry success and other developmental failures in 
India we can theorize new models of industrial development where other "stakeholders" 
provide significant input, particularly in emerging economies, where state capacity for 
industrial development and supporting institutions are often less robust and developed 
than those in industrialized countries. This shift embodies a broader shift away from a 
developmental state model and toward a model of "developmental governance" that more 
explicitly relies on multiple actors based in civil society, including trade associations. 
There are three main national level trade associations in India. These are the 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), the Associated 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), and the CII. These national 
associations have large direct memberships of companies. Under this broad 
Bureaucratic rationality without strategic rationality may lead to state incoherence and developmental 
failure and the case of India in the post-independence period is the exemplar of this argument (Chibber, 
2002). 
69 
representational umbrella are a number of regional chamber of commerce' and industry 
specific trade associations (or "sectorial associations") that represent the narrower 
interests within a specific industry. These associations are typically members in the 
national level trade associations and information concerning the agenda of these different 
association agendas may be shared. However, national level associations are less 
effective than sectorial associations at shaping industry specific policy because their 
diverse membership across various industries means that members have competing 
interests, which make it unlikely that membership consensus will emerge around specific 
T O 
policies (Pingle, 1999)/ Sectorial trade associations representing a single industry with 
narrower interests may be more effective in proposing and pursuing industrial policy and 
industry specific solutions and programs. 
NASSCOM is identified as the most important association representing the 
software and services industries according to industry managers (personal interview, VP, 
Infosys, Dec. 3, 2008)19 and governmental officials.40 NASSCOM was founded in 1988 
with 38 members (NASSCOM, 2009b), but today the organization has over 1300 
members comprised of both Indian and multinational companies that have a presence in 
India (NASSCOM, 2009a). Together, these members account for over 95 percent of the 
revenues of the software and service industry in India and employ over 2.24 million 
professionals (NASSCOM, 2009a). The high membership revenue percentage of the total 
" There are state and citywide associational bodies in India, such as the Bengal Chamber of Commerce and 
the Indian Chamber of Commerce in Bombay. This paper, however, focuses on those associations 
identified by government and industry leaders as playing the most central role in industry development. 
18 For a more sanguine view of the constructive role large national business associations may play on the 
political process see (Sinha, 2005). 
39 Personal interview, Vice President, Infosys, December 3, 2008; Personal interview, Executive, Infosys, 
December 10, 2008; Personal interview, Executive, Evalueserve, May 22, 2009. 
40 Personal interview, former IT Secretary, October 14, 2008; Personal interview, Director, Software 
Technology Parks of India, November 7 2008. 
70 
revenue generated in this sector in India provides the organization the legitimacy to speak 
as "the voice" of the industry with a high degree of credibility. The organizational 
structure of NASSCOM contains both positions filled by rotating company executives 
and full time staff. The elected company executives typically hail from the largest and 
most reputable firms in the industry, which skews the organizations' goals toward the 
interests of larger firms and away from the smaller firms that constitute the majority of 
the company membership base. 
The high growth rates associated with India's IT and ITES industries have 
prompted other developing economies (e.g., China, Brazil, Philippines, Poland, Russia 
and South Africa) to try to replicate India's service export model(Business India 
Intelligence, 2006). In addition, India's IT industry trade association, NASSCOM, serves 
as a model for other governments, entrepreneurs, and trade associations that seek to grow 
their developing country's burgeoning IT industries. Some foreign countries, mainly in 
Asia, Latin America, and Africa, want to replicate what NASSCOM has done in their 
countries,41 with some attempting to imitate the NASSCOM industry association model 
with organizations such as BRASSCOM in Brazil, GASSCOM in Ghana, and 
SLASSCOM in Sri Lanka (Rai, 2010). 
The partnership between the state and trade associations is one important source 
in helping to facilitate this industry move toward increasing higher value activities. 
NASSCOM adopted four roles in its interaction with the state to help the IT industry 
develop and upgrade in India.42 First, NASSCOM was instrumental in helping the 
41 Personal interview, Indian senior administrative servant, Government of India, February 27, 2009. 
421 do not argue that the relationships between the state and trade associations in India are the only factor in 
industrial development. Instead, I argue that it is an important, yet relatively ignored and under theorized 
factor in explaining industrial development in the IT and ITES sectors in India. 
71 
software industry gain recognition as a "strategic" industry from government officials 
and the general public. Broadening the government's perception of what is considered a 
strategic industry to include software and services, instead of just electronics and 
hardware manufacturing industries, was critical in order to build the emerging software 
cluster, remove industry specific constraints, and provide the basis on which future 
industrial upgrading could occur. Second, NASSCOM and CII helped remove industry 
constraints through lobbying and re-regulation. This was achieved in part through 
lobbying state officials for telecom deregulation, modification of paternalistic labor laws 
to permit women to work nights, and helping to coordinate government departments at 
various levels to streamline interaction with industry. Third, NASSCOM provided public 
relations and impression management services for the industry. This was instrumental in 
helping to change the perception of India beyond just a low cost labor destination, to one 
that has higher order capabilities. Fourth, NASSCOM provided the state leadership for 
further industry development as the industry matured and primary constraints on growth 
were removed. While each of these four roles arose during different periods to help solve 
industry specific problems, the adoption of a new role did not mean discarding the 
previous role. Rather, the association itself consistently increased its capabilities over 
time, juggling new responsibilities alongside existing ones. 
In establishing a more prominent role in industry development, NASSCOM's 
strategies have shifted in response to evolving industry challenges and the increasing 
capabilities of the associations. I argue that the cumulative result of these strategies has 
led to more influence on the state to shape the overall direction of developmental policy 
in the IT industry. In the most recent stage, NASSCOM has moved beyond policy 
72 
influence through lobbying to actually write policy on behalf of the state. " In the 
subsections below, I expand upon the nature of each of the four roles introduced above. 
Following this historically situated account, in section four I elaborate upon 
NASS.COM's expanded policy role. 
///. Recognition of Software as a Strategic Industry 
NASSCOM's primary focus from its inception, in December 1988 until the 
industry surpassed the $1 billion revenue mark in 1997, was to gain recognition as a 
strategic industry worthy of attention and support by the government. Without this 
recognition, the Association had little opportunity to achieve other collective goods on 
behalf of the industry. The organizational goal of recognition was closely associated with 
NASSCOM President Dewang Mehta's leadership of the Association from 1991 until his 
death in 2001. During this period NASSCOM aggressively promoted the industry in 
order to capture the attention of policy makers and the government and led the Indian 
government to begin to see software as a strategic industry.44 
Mehta raised the visibility of the industry domestically and internationally. Under 
his leadership NASSCOM became strong, financially successful, and "a recognized 
opinion-maker and leader in the IT Industry," turning the organization into "a major 
powerhouse, initially in Delhi, then all over India, and by the end of the nineties, all over 
the world"(Natarajan, 2001). Raising the visibility of the nascent industry was important 
because the Indian developmental state long held a bias toward manufacturing industries 
43 Saxenian's notes NASSCOM's role in shaping industry policy through lobbying, yet her work neglects 
the Association's leadership on far reaching programs that position the Association as an agent in industrial 
development through its partnership with the Indian state (Saxenian, 2000). 
44 Personal interview, former President, NASSCOM, July 7, 2006. 
73 
in conceiving and defining strategic industries and for crafting developmental policy 
(Chibber, 2004). The software and service industry was not an obvious choice for 
developmental efforts until the outreach and lobbying efforts by NASSCOM started to 
change governmental attitudes. The organizational success at recognition in these early 
years was embodied in the recognition Mehta received: 
It would not be an indulgence in hyperbole to say Dewang Mehta transformed an 
entire industry. His confidence about the ongoing successes of the software 
exports industry bordered on arrogance, . . . He straddled NASSCOM like a 
veritable colossus and made it an association that was the cynosure of all business 
and political eyes, an entity to be admired, sometimes hated and feared, but never 
ignored! (Natarajan, 2001) 
The fact that NASSCOM could no longer be ignored, particularly amongst politicians, 
points to one of the organization's key successes. Once NASSCOM had captured the 
attention of policy makers and the Indian public, it was in a position to more effectively 
push for other industry gains. This period, called the "evangelizing phase" by 
NASSCOM leadership, was instrumental in creating a forum and voice for the industry 
and allowed the organization to begin to create enduring relationships with governmental 
ministries that could help the industry remove constraints on growth. 
During the mid-to-late 1990s the organization gained widespread access to policy 
makers. According to one industry leader, "the doors of every bureaucrat and politician 
were always open to his [Mehta's] ideas and suggestions" (Natarajan, 2001). 
NASSCOM's political leadership was reflected in the appointment of Mehta's in 1988 as 
a member and spokesperson of the IT Task Force established by the Prime Minister to 
draft a national informatics policy ("Nasscom chief Dewang Mehta found dead in 
Sydney," 2001). During this period the Association gained formal representation on 
45 Personal interview, former President, NASSCOM, July 7, 2006. 
46 Personal interview, former President, NASSCOM, July 7, 2006. 
74 
various government committees, such as the Ministries of Information Technology, 
Commerce, Finance, Human Resources Development, Labor, External Affairs, and the 
Department of Telecommunication (NASSCOM, 2006a). 
NASSCOM moved from a relatively small and obscure sectorial association of a 
little known industry to a highly visible association representing a quickly growing 
industry in less than ten years. The Association's rise provided informal relational ties 
with individual politicians and formal organizational ties to government ministries that 
provided it the conduits through which it could influence policy makers on legislation 
and policies that affected the industry. 
IV. Lobbying and Deregulation 
NASSCOM's role historically and currently is focused on influencing 
governmental policy and improving the interaction between various governmental bodies 
and the industry. NASSCOM began formal lobbying in 1991 around tax waivers and 
incentives and then focused on deregulation efforts that helped to remove a number of 
obstacles to industry growth and development. During this time, the trade association 
continued to argue in favor of free trade, zero tariff protection, deregulation of the 
telecom market, and the creation of software technology parks (STP), which have helped 
to improve the growth and profits of the industry. In addition, the Association also urged 
the state to adopt and extend a number of financial incentives, such as state tax exemption 
on profits from software exports, discounted rates on utilities, and the infrastructural 
improvements in the special economic zones (SEZs) dedicated for the industry located in 
IT hub cities (NASSCOM, 2006a; Pingle, 1999). 
75 
A key early lobbying victory that helped the nascent Indian IT industry grow was 
a one-year waiver on income tax for software exports in the 1991 government-planning 
budget. NASSCOM President Dewang Mehta received an endorsement from 40 
Members of Parliament for the income tax waiver on software exports, which in turn led 
Dr. Manmohan Singh to provide a one-year waiver in the 1991 budget (Kanavi, 2001). 
The effect of the income tax break is widely credited with helping the industry grow. 
One of the most significant efforts NASSCOM lobbied for, according to industry, 
insiders, analysts, and NASSCOM leadership itself, was telecom deregulation.47 Before 
deregulation, it was extremely difficult to procure telephone lines and performance and 
reliability of utilities were also so bad that operating at a competitive global level was 
nearly impossible. According to management of leading Indian IT company Infosys,48 it 
took "a year to just get a telephone line" (Teather, 2007) and in 1982 "we lost a huge 
project because of that" (2007). As a result, telecom was identified as one of the main 
problems limiting the growth for the industry.49 NASSCOM launched an intense 
marketing campaign aimed at influencing policy makers and citizens to think of the 
industrial constraints limiting the growth of the new Indian economy. The marketing 
slogan used during the 1990s by the association was a play on a popular Hindi slogan, 
"Roti, kapda, makaan," which roughly translates to "food, clothing, shelter." The slogan 
referred to the three necessities citizens needed from the state. NASSCOM added two 
more necessities to that slogan, "Roti, kapada, makaan, bijlee, aur bandwidth," which 
Although deregulation is better conceived of as reregulation as noted above, I will continue to use 
deregulation to remain consistent with data sources. Telecommunications deregulation began in India in 
1991 with the removal of most industrial licensing agreements. This process proceeded slowly and 
unevenly over a ten-year period. 
48 Infosys is one of top ranked IT companies in India. (Dataquest, 2009) 
49 Personal interview, former President, NASSCOM, July 7, 2006. 
76 
translates to "food, clothing, shelter, electricity, and bandwidth." With the addition to 
the new phrase, electricity and bandwidth were given the same importance as food, 
clothing, and shelter. The slogan was directed at two audiences. One was "intended to 
catch the attention of the common man that these are essential necessities,"51 while the 
other was the state that at the time controlled both of these resources, but had difficulty 
providing them consistently and efficiently. 
Another aspect of NASSCOM's early lobbying agenda included efforts to loosen 
regulations governing foreign ownership and operations in industry in India. India had a 
number of restrictions that made foreign ownership difficult. This was due in part to the 
official socialist orientation of the state and government's wariness toward (foreign) 
capital and its efforts to restrict multinationals within the country during the 1970s. 
NASSCOM tried to attract multinational companies (MNCs) back to India during the 
early 1990s to build the credibility of the country as an IT destination and sourcing 
location. Attracting MNCs had the important effect of improving industry capabilities in 
India through training employees and technology transfer. According to a former 
President of NASSCOM, the strategy during this time was to bring subsidiaries of large 
MNCs first, then promote independent Indian company delivery second. The first three 
multinational companies to come to India were GE (1994), American Express (1996), 
and British Airways (named WNS). NASSCOM lobbied the government to make 
concessions on laws related to foreign ownership to get all three to come to India. 
NASSCOM effectively lobbied on behalf of the IT industry securing tax incentives, 
50 See ("A bachelor who romanced with IT," 2001). Personal interview, former NASSCOM President, July 
7, 2006. 
51 Personal interview, Vice President, NASSCOM, January 14, 2009. 
52 Personal interview, former President, NASSCOM, July 7, 2006. 
77 
deregulation of the telecommunications sector, and entry of foreign MNCs that provided 
a source of technology and skill transfer to industry. 
V. Public Relations and Impression Management 
The IT industry began to receive widespread recognition domestically and 
globally during the mid-to-late 1990s and the early 2000s, which prompted NASSCOM 
to increasingly manage pubic impressions both inside and outside India. The move 
toward more aggressive impression management during this period was a response to two 
main factors. First, in 1997 the IT industry in India surpassed one billion (USD) in 
revenues, which garnered public attention in India and abroad (Kanavi, 2001). The 
increasing attention from both inside and outside India required organized and sustained 
programs to address industry challenges ranging from concern over industry capabilities 
to the security of data processed in India. 
The second factor was the changing nature of the global organization of service 
work. During the late 1990s there was an intensification of the shift away from the 
"bodyshopping" model to a global delivery model. "Bodyshopping" refers to the 
movement of specialized labor, such as software engineers, from their home country, 
typically a low cost labor market, to another country that usually has high cost labor. 
During the dot-com boom of the late 1990s American IT companies pushed strongly for 
increases in the number of H1B visas, which permitted temporary entry of skilled 
professionals, such as computer programmers (Chellaraj, Maskus, & Mattoo, 2006). The 
bodyshopping of these IT engineers, often from India, was increasingly used as a solution 
to address the U.S. shortage of engineering talent. The common practice was a harbinger 
to the acceleration of offshore outsourcing of IT services as it provided familiarity with 
78 
foreign Indian programmers and provided a transfer of technology and "know-how" 
when these programmers returned to their country of origin. Western firms' experience 
working with Indian programmers, the economic imperative to cut labor costs in the face 
of a global technology slump, and large investments made in global telecommunication 
infrastructure during the dot-com boom led to an acceleration in offshore outsourcing to 
service delivery locations like India. This changing global organization of work in 
services brought increased attention from foreign governments and publics that were 
interested in or worried about the capabilities and the cost advantage of the Indian 
software and service industry. The rapid global industry adaptation from using "Indian 
labor" in the late 1990s to using "labor in India" in the early 2000s brought a host of new 
challenges that required impression management for "destination India." 
Two main concerns voiced among western firms and the general pubic were the 
capabilities of Indian labor and firms and the security of sensitive data processed by 
Indian labor for western firms. NASSCOM addressed these issues in a number of ways. 
These strategies included specific marketing campaigns, panels at their annual 
membership meeting, direct meetings and outreach to western firms and governments, 
and showcasing exemplary member companies to visitors from western firms and 
governments. 
In the mid-1990s NASSCOM sought to shift the perception of India as simply a 
low cost labor destination in software and services to a quality labor destination that can 
deliver high value (and higher profit margin) services. NASSCOM's efforts to shift this 
perception began as an impression management through marketing campaigns, trade 
conferences, foreign public relations, but later shifted into increasingly proactive 
79 
programs in partnership with the government to build educational capacity, labor quality, 
and the upgrading of worker skills. These more extensive efforts at upgrading worker 
skills and higher education will be discussed in detail below. 
Data security also became a significant concern as back office services providers 
in India processed increasing amounts of personal and firm level data in variety of 
sensitive areas including finance, human resources, and medical claims. NASSCOM 
responded with a number of events to raise awareness about the problems, while also 
signaling to the industry that this issue was being addressed (NASSCOM, 2006d). The 
Association also helped establish the India Cyber Lab, in conjunction with the Mumbai 
police, which was a unique PPP project that formed out of the first-ever Cyber Safety 
Week in 2003. Later NASSCOM crafted a "Security Initiatives" programs to address 
these concerns and push member companies to adopt more stringent security practices. 
These included creating awareness, setting guidelines, defining standards, creating 
special training on Information Security, and introducing certifications(NASSCOM, 
2006d). 
VI. Trade Associations in India's IT and ITES industries: Role as 
Developmental Actors 
In this section I detail the changing strategies NASSCOM has undertaken in order 
to deal with obstacles arising as the industry rapidly expands. I argue that NASSCOM's 
role and focus has become significantly broader, making it a key actor in industrial 
development in partnership with government. 
80 
The problems of recruitment, employee attrition, and rising labor costs became 
major obstacles for the industry as it grew exponentially (See Table 3.1 for employment 
growth), while trying to keep costs low for foreign customers. NASSCOM pursued two 
different strategies with the government in trying to expand the labor market and improve 
labor quality. One strategy that NASSCOM pursued focused on upgrading industry 
related education in the country. It has pursued this by stepping into the traditional 
governmental space of educational policy formation. Another strategy NASSCOM 
adopted was to help develop and promote emerging IT clusters in India. The organization 
achieved this by consulting with various state governments in India that were trying to 
replicate the success experienced in the largest IT hubs in India. These strategies 
demonstrate the ways in which the trade association moved into traditional governmental 
areas of activity. Yet, it is important to recognize that NASSCOM was invited by central 
and state governments to partner with them to draft and help implement these industrial 
policies in areas that were traditionally the sole domain of the state. These practices 
demonstrate the broadening scope of PPPs, their increasing use as a developmental 
strategy in developing countries, and the further blurring of the already porous 
boundaries between the state and civil society. 
81 
Table 3.1: Knowledge professionals employed in the Indian IT BPO sector 
IT 
Exports 
BPO 
Exports 
Domestic 
Market 
Total 
2000 
110,000 
42.000 
132.000 
284,000 
2001 
162,000 
70.000 
198,114 
430,114 
2002 
170,000 
106.000 
246.250 
522,250 
2003 
205,000 
180.000 
285.000 
670,000 
2004 
296.000 
216,000 
318.000 
830,000 
2005 
390.000 
316,000 
352,000 
1,058,000 
2006 
513,000 
415,000 
365.000 
1,293,000, 
2007 
690.000 
553.000 
378.000 
1,621,000 
2008 
860.000 
700.000 
450.000 
2,010,000 
2009 
946.809 
789.806 
500.000 
2,236,614 
Figures do not include employees in the hardware section 
Source: Compiled based upon on (NASSCOM, 2006a, 2009a) 
oo 
IN) 
/. Trade Association Efforts at Upgrading Education 
The Indian government first identified education in software as a focal area in 
1986. At this time, it began to consider the training needs of this industry as distinct from 
others. These educational reform efforts included updating curricula to take account of 
new software development methods and technologies. Yet, industry needs have continued 
to outpace the ability of the government to assess skill gaps and recommend changes in 
curricula. According to one scholar, by 1996 "skill constraints continuefd] to afflict the 
Indian software industry including the demand-supply gap (especially for higher-level 
skills and for domestic-oriented production)" (Heeks, 1996, p. 283). In addition, many of 
the governmental upgrading efforts in higher education were implemented very slowly. 
For example, a 1986 proposal to create four Indian Institutes of Information Technology 
(HIT) remained unimplemented until 1998, when the first HIT (Hyderabad) was founded, 
due to disagreements between government ministries responsible for its 
implementation.53 
These policy failures underscore the Indian government's incoherence and 
shortcomings in preparing labor for industry needs. Due to these continued problems, 
industry lobbied for educational changes and NASSCOM sought to influence education 
reform since 1991 (Pingle, 1999, p. 151). Yet by 2001, they elevated this issue amongst 
its member companies and became increasingly involved with educational policies at 
engineering colleges. For example, Indian's best known IT entrepreneur, founder of 
Infosys, and former NASSCOM President, Narayana Murthy, gave a speech on education 
at the NASSCOM 2001 Conference that was also devoted to education (Kanavi, 2001). 
51 The disagreements were between the Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD) and the 
Department of Electronics (DoE) (Heeks, 1996, p. 283). 
83 
This speech delivered by a high status individual in the industry coupled with the 
conference theme on education signaled to industry members and observers inside and 
outside India the importance of education on future growth of the industry. In addition, to 
raising awareness of the importance of education, the Association held serious 
discussions around the specific task of upgrading the engineering colleges on which the 
industry in India relies. According to then President Dewang Mehta, "there is serious 
discussion going on among us on how to raise the standards of the 43 regional 
engineering colleges to those of IITs" (Quoted inKanavi, 2001). The Association also 
began to consider ways industry could contribute funds to improve the quality of 
engineering education. NASSCOM sought to, 
revitaliz[e] the Indian technical and engineering education to provide a high 
quantity of high-quality engineers to achieve export goals of $50 billion. This is a 
major initiative and creating a separate industry fund for this purpose is also being 
considered. (Kanavi, 2001) 
Besides discussing how educational upgrading would be paid for, this excerpt also 
suggests the broad scope of this project as a "major initiative." 
Dissatisfied with the pace and content of education policy change, NASSCOM 
increasingly led developmental efforts by stepping into the traditional governmental 
space of educational policy formation in order to promote private sector participation in 
the education system.54 Although India produces more engineers than any other country 
in the world, many of them simply do not have the skills and experience to work for 
foreign companies. According to one industry manager, "there are 16,000 colleges who 
have more than 400,000 engineers coming out, only 25 percent of whom are classified as 
54 Other associations also contributed to efforts, such as CII's focus on "education, sharing platforms for 
education, sharing platforms with skill development" (Personal interview, Senior Director, CII, January 12, 
2009). 
84 
being employable." This statistic of a 75 percent shortage of employable graduates from 
universities was cited in an industry report that highlighted the mismatch between skills 
of graduates and the skills required by industry (NASSCOM & McKinsey, 2005). This 
skill shortfall was used by the organization to justify their efforts to reduce this mismatch 
through programs focused on training and education reforms and upgrading.56 Other 
managers and government officials also noted the shortfall of adequate skills among 
graduates, which corroborates NASSCOM's analysis and the underlying need to do 
something to address the shortfall. Further complicating this picture is the fact that not all 
engineering graduates have the number of years of educational training expected of their 
counterparts from developed countries. Indian engineering totals include those that 
received four-year degrees as well as three-year training and diploma holders (Wadwa, 
Gereffi, Rissing, & Ong, 2007). 
One central problem with India's educational system where the industry is 
concerned is its pedagogical methods. In India, pedagogy historically has focused on rote 
memorization. In general, however, industry is looking for, "individuals having an ability 
for problem solving, to be able to think 'out-of-the-box,' to be able to basically 
communicate, and . . . in the domain space, to have the ability to understand and to apply, 
because most of the questions or assessments that are done in the colleges usually focus 
on rote learning and the lower order thinking skills..." The skills that employees lack 
may be technical, industry specific knowledge, and cultural and interpersonal 
53 Personal interview, Vice President, Infosys, December 3, 2008. 
56 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, January 30, 2009; Personal interview, Director NASSCOM, 
April 7, 2009. 
57 Personal interview, Manager, Infosys, November 23, 2007. 
58 Personal interview, senior Indian civil service officer, February 27, 2009. 
59 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, April 7, 2009. 
85 
communication skills. Key skill deficiencies included generic technical knowledge or 
"hard skills" (i.e. IT or accountancy skills), domain skills (knowledge specific to an 
industry, such as telecommunications or automotive), and "soft skills" (i.e. interpersonal 
or inter-cultural skills). 
In response to the mismatch between graduate skills and those skills needed by 
industry NASSCOM began its most extensive and coordinated effort at reforming higher 
education in India with the launch of its "Educational Initiative." In December 2006, 
NASSCOM appointed a Director of its Educational Initiative, hired staff to support the 
program, and helped to drive some of the recent educational policy changes in India.61 
The NASSCOM Educational Initiative is composed of a number of different programs 
aimed at closing the skill gap identified above and at enhancing the upgrading of skills of 
the workforce through increased education quality, capacity, and tighter linkages between 
academia and industry. The goal of the Educational Initiative is to increase the number 
of IT graduates and PhDs and the number and quality of faculty in information 
technology. 
NASSCOM, in conjunction with the Government of India's Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (MHRD), which overseas educational policy in the country, and 
with funding by the World Bank, presented a comprehensive PPP aimed at upgrading 
higher education in India. Several resource rich firms that developed educational outreach 
programs on their own contributed their insight and experience. For example, one 
respondent at Infosys "worked quite closely" with NASSCOM in order to "see if some of 
the education that we do can be taken out to the schools, [and] how we can influence the 
60 Personal interview, Vice President, Infosys, December 3, 2008. 
61 Other industries are also involved in influencing educational reform, but are not taking a leadership role 
relative to the IT industry (personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, 1/30/2009). 
86 
education system of the country . . . at the national level". Despite educational program 
plan input from members in some areas, it was the trade association that culled these 
disparate and small-scale activities together, while adding other features, such as plans 
for expanding the number of engineering colleges, into a scalable national program in 
partnership with the government. 
One element of the overall government plan was to increase the number of IT 
engineering colleges in the country. NASSCOM was the key coordinating body that 
drafted and submitted the overarching PPP plan that will create twenty new Indian 
Institute of Information Technology (HIT) universities (in addition to the existing six) in 
order to address the increasing skill challenges of the Indian IT industry (NASSCOM, 
2008) The report states that it "entrusted NASSCOM with the responsibility of preparing 
a Model Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the HIT initiative" that will serve as a 
template for each of the twenty individual IIITs "and it is expected that there will be 
minimal variations" (NASSCOM, 2008). From this document it is clear that NASSCOM 
is leading the government in India in drafting the policy. The Model DPR document was 
submitted to the MHRD on May 23, 2008 and NASSCOM is assisting the Ministry and 
state governments to operationalize the plan that was approved by the central government 
(Ministry of Human Resource Development, 2010a). The Government of India 
committed to building 2000 crores " for their establishment of the twenty new IIITs in its 
Eleventh Five Year Plan and budgeted (Government of India Planning Commission, 
2009). The DPR focused on the vision for the institutes; the governance structure; 
operational details like land and infrastructure, courses, curriculum, student admissions 
62 Personal interview, Vice President, Infosys, December 3, 2008. 
63 A "crore" is a unit of measurement in India equal to ten million. 
87 
and faculty; the financial model for the institutes and indicative locations for the 
institutes. 
The increased role corporate partners have in higher education in this plan reflects 
the shift in neoliberal institutional practices in the state sphere of higher education. The 
governance structure of the IIITs is based upon a combination of state governments, the 
central government, and corporate partners. Corporate partners are expected to provide a 
majority of the financial funding of each HIT, which will likely translate into a greater 
degree of corporate influence in the operation of the universities relative to the state. The 
plan specifies that the central government will provide a maximum of 14.9 crores and 
corporations will provide a minimum of 15.1 crores (NASSCOM, 2008). The corporate 
partners will also select employees from their firms to serve on the faculty for an 
"extended period time" rather than the current guest lecturer approach (NASSCOM, 
2008). 
Another key aspect of the NASSCOM plan includes training faculty at 
universities and engineering colleges in up to date methodologies and technologies 
through National Faculty Development Programs. Leading member companies, such as 
Infosys, have experience developing and running industry outreach programs and provide 
input into the faculty development programs used by NASSCOM. A manager described 
how Infosys' own "Campus Connect" Program was used as a model to design the faculty 
enablement program and the national curriculum in schools and later integrated into the 
NASSCOM Educational Initiative.64 The national faculty development program proposed 
by NASSCOM increases the scope of this effort to target 20,000 professors for training. 
The "pulling up" of Infosys' "Campus Connect" program by NASSCOM is one example 
64 Personal Interview, Vice President, Infosys, December 3, 2008. 
88 
of firm level development practices that are aggregated and incorporated into industry 
level polices that address skill shortages and upgrading potential in the industry. 
NASSCOM increasingly adopted a broader agenda and more comprehensive 
tactics in its attempt to achieve educational reform. For example, the organization shifted 
from advocating stronger education to actually developing a plan with the government 
that seeks to achieve educational goals based upon proven concepts developed by specific 
firms in its membership and integrating these plans with additional research and policies 
into a national education plan. Additional effort also went into coordinating industry 
insiders, government ministries, and universities around this plan. The scope and depth of 
this plan constitutes something more significant than and distinct from typical trade 
association lobbying efforts. 
ii. Efforts in Developing New IT Clusters: Tier II and Tier III Cities 
NASSCOM worked with state and central governments on a range of infrastructural 
projects that directly contribute to cluster development. These efforts included advising 
on industry needs concerning communication and power infrastructure into IT office 
parks, space requirements for industry, organizing and hosting public meetings with 
developers, governmental officials, and industry insiders to shape SEZ development 
(Kannan, 2008; Nasscom miffed with current IT SEZ norms," 2006). NASSCOM also 
advises on a broad array of city planning issues, such as road access, wireless access to IT 
commuters stuck in traffic, and consulting on new international airports. For example, 
NASSCOM worked with the "Civil Aviation Ministry to convert airports in Hyderabad, 
Bangalore, Ahmedabad, and Pune into international airports so that global movement of 
IT professionals becomes less of a pain" (Kannan, 2008). The Association's most 
89 
significant infrastructural project involvement, however, has been providing city planning 
recommendations and plans to state governments to help them develop new and existing 
industry clusters. 
NASSCOM undertook an effort to develop less developed IT cities in order to 
help address growing industry labor and resource shortages in saturated IT hub cities. The 
offshoring boom that accelerated during the late 1990s and early 2000s lead to a 
tightening labor market, increased labor costs, low employee retention, and strained 
infrastructure in booming IT hubs where most of the work was carried out in India. For 
example, 92.7 percent of industry exports come from the top 7 IT cities in the country 
(NASSCOM, 2009a). These cities are Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi's National Capital 
Region (NCR), Hyderabad/ Secunderabad, Kolkata, Mumbai and Pune (See Table 3.2: 
City wise spread of NASSCOM Membership). Industry, led by NASSCOM, sought to 
address its shortage in educated labor by shifting some industry growth toward what the 
industry calls Tier II and Tier III Indian cities. 
90 
Table 3.2: City wise spread of NASSCOM Membership 
"°™° 
If Iff 
i f f " J \ if 1 \ 
_y 
NCR 22 1 % 
• Bangalore 21 1 % 
Mumbai 19 1 % 
Chennai 10 .9% 
• Hyderabad/ 
Secunderabad 9 8% 
Others 8 3% 
• Pune 6 2 % 
Kolkata 2 .5% 
Source: (NASSCOM, 2009a) 
Table 3.3: Development of Tier II and Tier III Indian Cities 
^-Most attractive 
Leaders 
(Tier I Cities) 
Bangalore 
Chennai 
Hyderabad 
Kolkata 
Mumbai 
NCR 
Pune 
Location Attractiveness 
Challengers 
(Tier II Cities) 
Ahmedabad 
Bhubaneshwar 
Chandigarh 
Coimbatore 
Indore 
Jaipur 
Kochi 
Lucknow 
Madurai 
Mangalore 
Nagpur 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Tiruchirapalh 
Vadodara 
Visakhapatnam 
Least attractive -> 
Followers 
(Tier III Cities) 
Aurangabad 
Bhopal 
Goa 
Gwahor 
Hubh-Dharwad 
Kanpur 
Mysore 
Nashik 
Pondicherry 
Salem 
Surat 
Vijayawada 
Aspirants 
Allahabad 
Dehradun 
Durgapur 
Gangtok 
Guwahati 
Ludhiana 
Patna 
Raipur 
Ranchi 
Shimla 
Siliguri 
Snnagar 
Varanasi 
Source Compiled from (NASSCOM & Kearney, 2008) 
91 
NASSCOM is helping to facilitate the development of Tier II and Tier III cities 
by engaging the government and then later directly advising and supporting their efforts. 
Government officials, particularly chief ministers of local states, are eager to spread the 
benefits of the IT industry to smaller cities in the country and attract additional revenue 
and jobs (NASSCOM, 2006e). By helping to attract industry to Tier II and III cities, one 
NASSCOM director says, "we will get government support because it actually addresses 
inequity and access to quality life." A government official responsible for promoting 
the IT industry in the state of Kamataka stated that the problem is that "start-up costs 
[are] too high in Bangalore and [the] solution is to move to Tier II and Tier III" because 
". . . labor is cheaper and land is more available". 
NASSCOM began consulting for state governments on developing new industrial 
clusters after it received "requests from multiple states that we [NASSCOM] should do a 
study on which locations in those respective states are as close to being ready as possible 
to become IT hubs."67 NASSCOM commissioned a study that identified and analyzed 50 
potential IT cities in India; seven of which are called the leaders (noted in Table 3.2) and 
the remaining 43 designated as challengers, followers, and aspirants (See Table 3.3: 
Development of Tier II and Tier III Cities).68 The study provided a detailed analysis of 
industry needs along key parameters, such as labor skill availability, infrastructure, social 
and living environment, business environment, government support, operating costs, 
delineated positive and negative attributes in each city, and detailed the tasks state 
65 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, January 30, 2009. 
66 Personal interview, Government Official in Department of Informational Technology, Biotechnology, 
and Science and Technology, State of Karnataka, March 9, 2009. 
67 Personal interview, Vice President, NASSCOM, January 14, 2009. 
68 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, January 30, 2009 and (NASSCOM & Kearney, 2008) 
92 
governments needed to address in order to attract IT companies to their cities 
(NASSCOM & Kearney, 2008). 
After sharing the report "some of the state governments then wanted us 
|NASSCOM] to put together a blue print on how to go about bringing those up to speed, 
so that is again something that one is working with state governments."69 At this point, 
state governments wanted more than just an analysis on where Tier II and III cities stood, 
but also a plan on how state governments could develop the clusters to be more 
competitive against their peers. Providing plans to state governments on how to develop 
city infrastructure represents a significant break from the lobbying activities trade 
associations are recognized for. It also shows how far NASSCOM has come from its 
early years when it was fighting for government attention and recognition as a strategic 
industry. Now state governments solicit the Association for their recommendations and 
plans on how to develop their cities to attract companies. 
One approach state governments have taken to attract companies to these cities is 
to offer new benefits and tax incentives and upgraded infrastructure. A NASSCOM 
director explained the Association's role in drawing attention to these incentives: 
I think it is very necessary for us to actually see that this [move to Tier II and Tier 
III cities] happens. So, we would be helping our industry move. So what 
NASSCOM does is we have 7 regions, [and] regional councils. We advise all our 
regional council members to actually see why it is good for them to move and 
how the STPI [Software Technology Parks of India] and SEZ rules permit 
actually a lot of tax rebates for them to move up there . . .7 
In this quote, one can see how NASSCOM actively promotes industry to move to these 
less developed locations by reaching out to firms through its regional council structure. 
The Association also educates the industry on the tax rebates and incentives that the 
69 Personal interview, Vice President, NASSCOM, January 14, 2009. 
70 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, January 30, 2009. 
93 
Government of India provides through the STPI and SEZ schemes in order to help 
facilitate this move. 
Although it takes time to develop an industrial cluster there are already signs that 
the strategy is succeeding. According to the former Secretary of IT in the state of 
Karnataka, 
IT companies are going [to Tier II and Tier III cities]. They are going to Mysore, 
they are going to Mangalore. . . . Last year in Mysore, the total exports increased, 
I am talking year on year 100% in Mysore. It was 74% in Mangalore, year on 
7! 
year. So Mangalore and Mysore are picking up very well. 
Thus, NASSCOM and state governments appear to be successfully promoting new 
cluster formation. 
Some firms are attracted to these Tier II and III cities to find alternatives to the 
competitive labor market in the top 7 IT hub cities. The move toward these less saturated 
Tier II and III cities provides industry access to new sources of labor, at lower costs, with 
higher employee retention. It also provides access to cheaper power and more plentiful 
77 
land for business needs. According to one Senior Manager, in order to help with the 
shortage of skilled labor and rising wages, they are hiring employees from the Tier II and 
Tier III cities and are opening more offices there. Despite the attractiveness of labor 
availability, higher rates of employee retention, and labor skills for some firms operating 
in Tier II and III cities, some firms remain reluctant to move to these locations because 
they are worried about the availability of high-level skills. 
The shortage in high-level skills in Tier II and III cities is at least partly due to the 
relatively weak educational levels in these cities relative to more developed cities. IT hub 
71 Personal interview, November 15, 2007. 
72 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, January 30, 2009. 
73 Personal interview, Senior Manager, Infosys, January 4, 2008. 
94 
cities (Tier I cities) usually have colleges that are much better than Tier II and III cities. 
This is because they have higher enrollment and fees, which allows them to "pay the 
teachers a substantial amount, which means they get the best quality teachers and they 
have a curriculum, which is quite progressive because of which the placement records are 
almost 100 percent, so most of our member companies usually go there." 4 Although 
there are a sufficient number of graduates in Tier II and III cities, they have not reached 
the quality of those produced by colleges in the Tier I cities.75 The reason for the lower 
levels of educational quality is because these cities are more economically depressed, the 
schools have low quality teaching, high student to faculty ratios, and difficulty finding 
faculty with the appropriate qualifications and training for the subjects that they teach.76 
In order to address these specific concerns about education and skills in Tier II 
and III cities, thereby making these locations more attractive to industry, NASSCOM is 
trying to improve equitable access to education and upgrade labor skills as part of its 
larger national Educational Initiative.77 Explains one director, NASSCOM works with 
universities to identify "what it is that they are deficient in and how they could improve 
T O 
it." The Association is proactively informing each of the state governments about these 
recommendations and the work the organization and its members are performing with 
7Q 
universities in order to improve the educational system to meet future industry needs. 
Over the coming years graduates from universities in these lower Tiered schools may be 
more capable of performing more skill intensive and higher value tasks. 
74 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, January 30, 2009. 
75 Ibid. 
76 Ibid. 
77 Ibid. 
78 Ibid. 
79 Ibid. 
95 
NASSCOM's recommendations and planning activities on behalf of state and city 
planners serve to blend the demarcating line between state and industry activities, while 
also further expanding the role served by trade associations in cluster development. As in 
the case of educational reform discussed above, NASSCOM's involvement in cluster 
development demonstrates its growing role in industrial development, which extends 
beyond lobbying efforts and advising to include highly involved planning. 
VII. Conclusion 
In this chapter I have argued that trade associations try to develop an industry. In 
particular, they may play various roles in attempting to facilitate an industry shift from 
production of low value toward high value products and services through their 
engagement with the state, firms and developers, universities, and other stakeholders. 
Drawing on an analysis of NASSCOM's efforts in industry development, I examined 
some strategies used by trade associations to contribute to industry development. In the 
case, I argue over time such strategies have come to extend beyond coordinating or 
lobbying activities to include actual planning and policymaking. Under the umbrella of 
the neoliberal state, these previously under theorized civil society actors - trade 
associations - are key actors in efforts to develop industries. 
The early years of NASSCOM demonstrate the organization's influence and 
effectiveness in gaining recognition and concessions for the industry and in managing 
public perceptions that directly affected the industry. Specifically, NASSCOM 
established itself as the key associational player in the IT industry, achieved or provided 
greater access to a number of collective goods for the industry, such as tax incentives and 
96 
telecommunication infrastructure, and effectively managed industry impressions 
domestically and abroad. However, it was the shift toward a global service delivery 
model, the acceleration in the volume of service over a billion US dollars, the broadening 
scope of services exported from India in early 2000s, and the new constraints that these 
industry shifts provided that prompted the Association to adopt a more proactive and 
expanded agenda. 
NASSCOM's policy work on education and its efforts to promote and plan cluster 
development most clearly reflects the degree to which NASSCOM sought greater 
participation in areas traditionally considered state responsibilities. I argue that the 
Association's actions in these traditional state areas approximated a quasi-state role in the 
industry development process and as a result, represent a qualitative shift from the pure 
lobbying and coordinating role trade associations traditionally hold in development in the 
academic literatures. 
Yet, trade associations did not replace the state in planning functions or policy 
implementation. Rather, the state invited industry to participate in these partnerships. 
State officials were eager to work with the IT industry once the industry had attained a 
degree of visibility and had become a significant export revenue producer. In particular, 
government officials hoped to attract IT companies to new potential IT hubs in an effort 
to replicate the success achieved in the primary IT hub cities. The growth in IT 
simultaneously highlighted the revenue potential of the industry and, under the 
cumulative effort from NASSCOM and other firms, the educational requirements for 
future industry upgrading and development. As a result, both the state and industry were 
motivated to pursue public-private partnerships to address these issues. 
97 
The PPPs formed between NASSCOM and the Indian state offer further evidence 
that the traditional model of development driven by a centralized governmental 
bureaucracy has given way to a more decentralized model of developmental governance 
where a number of actors collaborate through recurring interaction in a larger ecosystem. 
The PPP model requires tighter collaboration with a variety of stakeholders, including 
departments and agencies at various levels of government at the city, state, and federal 
levels; firms; associations; developers; and educational institutions. 
While this analysis suggests broadly that sectorial trade associations may play a 
key role in industry development and upgrading, it also acknowledges associations that 
have broad memberships spanning multiple industries may have a weak or negligible 
influence on pushing industry in this direction. In this case, the national industry 
association, CII, played a complementary role to sectorial associations by building 
consensus behind broad industry positions and programs. One example cited above was 
the early supporting role CII played in influencing the state to deregulate the 
telecommunications industry. In this case, broad national industry associations were 
hindered by the difficulty of forming an industry consensus around such diverse member 
interests, which made them less focused, effective, and consistent in providing leadership 
on development and upgrading that directly affected the IT and ITES industries. Industry 
associations with a broad membership stretching across multiple industries, however, 
may potentially play a more significant role in upgrading industries by helping firms 
form business ties that enable firms to develop, test, market, and sell new products and 
98 
services that address the needs of underserved domestic markets. These business ties 
may also provide an emerging industry the opportunity to perform the whole range of 
activities of a product or service (beyond just the low value, low skill activities typically 
"offshored" to developing economies), which more quickly facilitate industry upgrading. 
Developmental governance driven in partnership with trade associations is a 
potential mechanism to facilitate industry development in other industries and developing 
countries. However, it is important to recognize that associations form after an initial 
cluster of companies is already established and able to collectively organize. As a result, 
as the Indian IT case suggests, partnership with trade associations may occur after an 
industry is already formed. For this reason, state partnerships with trade associations are 
not likely to facilitate entry into completely new industries, as was the case in the DBS. 
Yet, trade associations, once established, may become key actors interacting with the 
state to guide, coordinate, draft, help implement developmental policy and help advance 
upgrading in industries that are already established. This mechanism may in fact operate 
in other industrial sectors or in other developing countries that have similar state society 
relations to those found in the Indian IT case; such cases may offer potential areas for 
future analysis of the role of trade associations in developing countries 
80 CII pursued this strategy by organizing industry to focusing on small to medium sized domestic firms in 
India that are relatively neglected by IT firms focused on the export market (Observations from CII IT 
policy meeting, New Delhi, February 20, 2009). 
99 
Chapter 4 
Knowledge Transfer 
/. Introduction 
A central question of this dissertation is: how do industries in developing 
countries "upgrade" to higher value activities? In order for this process to take place, we 
need to understand different processes of skill development that enable upgrading. One 
critical process that my data suggest plays a crucial role in industry upgrading in Indian 
firms is the transfer of knowledge between organizations based in developed economies 
and those firms based in developing economies. This may occur through two 
mechanisms. One is through the movement of technically skilled workers between 
developed countries and India, prior to the founding of Indian service firms. The second 
is through ongoing interactions between India-based service providers and their clients 
after Indian firms are already established. Because firms in developing countries face 
higher barriers in accessing the skills and knowledge to compete with firms in developed 
economies (Gereffi & Korzeniewicz, 1994), both of these knowledge-transfer processes 
are particularly important in helping firms in developing regions move into higher value 
tasks. 
The fragmentation of global production coupled with the rise of global production 
networks has resulted in the dispersal of production across country boundaries (Gereffi & 
Korzeniewicz, 1994; Sturgeon, 2002). This intensification of production networks 
spanning across borders has caused some country-focused development strategies to 
100 
falter (Amsden, 1989; Johnson, 1982; Wade, 1990b). Instead, in a system of dispersed 
industrial production networks, the transfer of knowledge between firms and via 
"reverse" migration of skilled workers across country borders are key mechanisms that 
lead to industrial upgrading (Gereffi, 1999; Saxenian, 2006). My findings suggest that 
two primary factors facilitate knowledge transfer between firms in developed and 
developing countries in the outsourcing industry: first, the migration of technically skilled 
workers back to their native countries and, second, firm-facilitated cross-national learning 
through the physical movement of their employees to their client site and through 
ongoing client-vendor interactions through collaboration via phone, email, and the hand 
off of work. Though knowledge transfer via interfirm relationships and the movement of 
workers plays a crucial role in the upgrading process, there are two structural constraints 
that limit these strategies' effectiveness in fostering the upgrading process. It is these 
mechanisms - both enabling and constraining - that I explore in the present chapter. 
In all four of the cases discussed below, I find that knowledge was transferred 
from developed regions to developing countries through the movement of key employees 
traveling between India and the US. The sources, methods, and timing of the knowledge 
transfer varied between companies. A precondition for knowledge transfer in all four 
cases is a strong background in higher education and post-graduate work. Each firm 
needs a broad base of "knowledge workers" in addition to whatever training the firm 
executives may possess, in order to be effective knowledge service providers. This was 
true even for the Global Radiology Center (GRC) and Infosys, who were more dependent 
upon the clients for learning how to provide these services than Teleradiology Solutions 
and Evalueserve. 
101 
For Teleradiology Solutions and Evalueserve, the founders' professional 
experiences with their previous employers allowed them to test ideas and delivery 
concepts that they later developed into a business model for their respective 
organizations. In these cases the most important knowledge transfer occurred prior to 
their formal establishment of their respective organizations. For the GRC and Infosys, in 
contrast, the interaction with existing clients were the primary mechanisms for the 
transfer of skills required to successfully deliver knowledge services. Both firms used the 
regular movement of workers between the client and the Indian offices as a primary 
source of learning. This increased reliance on clients can be attributed to two factors. 
First, the GRC and Infosys lacked experience providing these specific services until they 
began providing them within the context of their relationships with their customers. 
Second, the services Infosys and the GRC provided are much more deeply integrated into 
their client's processes than is the case with Teleradiology Solutions and Infosys. As a 
result, Infosys and the GRC's relationships with clients were characterized by consistent 
contact, via phone and email on a weekly or daily basis, to share information necessary 
for the delivery of work. Below, Table 4.1 provides an overview of the primary sources 
of knowledge and the mechanisms for transfer. 
102 
Table 4.1: Overview of Firm Sources of Knowledge 
Finance 
Medical 
Primary transfer mechanism: 
Learning through client 
relationship 
Infosys 
Movement of employees to client 
site to document process & 
training. 
Constraint: access to client 
knowledge 
Global Radiology Centre (GRC) 
Indian doctors trained by client, 
which in turn train rest of offshore 
team 
Constraint: access to proprietary 
knowledge & US credentialed 
labor 
Primary transfer mechanism: 
Learning through technical migration 
Evalueserve 
Founders learned knowledge required 
through education & work abroad with 
MNCs 
Teleradiology Solutions 
Founding radiologist took US 
credential, medical training & 
experience back to India. Hired 
additional credentialed US radiologists 
who could do the same. 
In elaborating on the above-mentioned dynamics, this chapter proceeds as 
follows. I begin by briefly discussing some critical constraints on upgrading and their 
implications for our understanding of the structural limitations of knowledge transfer in 
the existing global market. Next, I identify the primary knowledge transfer mechanisms 
in each of the four cases that are the focus of this study. In doing so, I also analyze the 
founding of each firm and/or the service offering it provides, which sheds light on the 
role of prior (foreign) education and training, and a lack thereof as is sometimes the case 
under professional authority. As I examine each of the cases, which were briefly 
introduced in the Introduction to this dissertation, I provide further background on the 
firms. Finally, I draw these case analyses together in order to highlight the key 
mechanisms for knowledge transfer for upgrading, given existing structural constraints. 
103 
//. Limitations on Upgrading 
As noted, industrial upgrading faces significant obstacles, particularly as an 
industry moves into higher value activities. In the global trade of professional services 
there are two major constraints on industrial upgrading that determine the scope, method, 
and extent of learning. These constraints are 1) lack of access to propriety knowledge, 
data, methods, and systems and 2) professional and legal barriers for upgrading. The lack 
of access to firm knowledge can be overcome through trade relationships, if given access, 
but these may constrain or slow learning to the lower skill end of operations, which is a 
product of the clients' desire to retain a competitive advantage. Yet, through a process of 
trust and growing capability, upgrading into a succession of higher value tasks is 
achievable. This is the traditional route of upgrading in manufacturing and apparel 
industries, characterized by a step-wise move into increasingly complex and higher value 
activities. 
The second of these constraints around professionalization is of particular interest 
for this study. Both financial and medical industries have occupational and professional 
groups that define labor qualifications that serve to restrict some tasks to specific groups 
of laborers, thereby excluding others. The medical profession has been much more 
effective than finance in enlisting government support to legally protect specified, high 
value tasks through credentialism. In turn, the interaction between the state and 
professional associations has a vast effect on the structure of opportunities for 
professional service offshoring. Of the industries addressed in this study, teleradiology is 
a much more tightly controlled industry than finance, which makes it particularly difficult 
for radiologists overseas to practice. The medical industry is characterized by a history of 
104 
effective lobbying from the medical profession, which created a professional monopoly 
over medical services. This particular institutional history constrains international 
teleradiology services, in general, and limits how knowledge is transferred, in particular. 
The constraints on the teleradiology industry in India can be explained with 
reference to the sociological literature on professions and expertise. Professions are 
characterized by expertise, power, and authority (Abbott, 1988); they seek to protect this 
power and authority though the creation of a monopoly over competence, officially 
sanctioned as "expertise" (Larson, 1977). Professional associations act as representative 
agencies for individual members, shaping and redefining appropriate practices of 
interaction amongst their memberships (Greenwood, et al., 2002), acting collectively to 
lobby government agencies for recognition and protection of professional rights. 
The accounting profession, in contrast to medical professions, has been relatively 
unsuccessful in preventing accounting related corporate jobs from moving offshore to 
lower cost markets. This is primarily due to the lack of legal protection that the state 
provides the accounting profession. One does not actually need an accountant credential 
for most types of U.S. corporate accounting related work. However, one does need a 
medical credential and license to practice medicine. The legal protections that the 
medical profession has garnered through its historical interaction with government have 
made these jobs much less likely to move abroad: significant structural and legal barriers 
of entry exist for offshore firms aiming to provide these services. 
By the 1950s the radiology profession secured exclusive rights to interpret 
medical images by excluding engineers and physicists from medical radiography, barring 
other physicians from interpreting images, and by controlling the education and registry 
105 
of radiology technologists (Barley, 1986; Larkin, 1978). The interaction of medical 
professional associations, government regulators, managed care groups, and the increased 
bureaucratization of the healthcare field have led to a number of constraints on 
international teleradiology. Specifically, factors such as Medicare's restrictions on paying 
for teleradiology interpretations outside the country; credentialing by managed care 
organizations; privileging of teleradiology providers by hospitals and healthcare 
organizations; licensing by state boards; and malpractice costs and restrictions were most 
restrictive (Forman, 2006). A mark of just how effective the U.S. radiology profession 
has been in protecting its monopoly through legislation and regulation is the fact that it 
has had difficulty increasing staff levels to meet labor shortages and increased service 
demand. 
In medical services, medical credentials establish a ceiling above which firms 
cannot upgrade even if they have the skills to provide those services. The practice of 
credentialism in general disproportionately excludes groups who lack access to higher 
education, reproducing existing social divisions, particularly along class lines (Collins, 
1979). An adherence to credentialism also disadvantages those who migrate across 
borders, where previous professional credentials are no longer recognized. While the rise 
of IT enabled services has opened up new opportunities for workers in developing 
countries through offshore work, it also extends professional authority and the potential 
for labor market exclusion through credentialism and professional authority. This is of 
particular relevance to the endeavors of foreign trained or certified radiology 
professionals. The GRC has Indian radiologists that were professionally trained for 
higher level, interpretive work and are capable of providing those services to India as 
106 
well as to other more developed economies. Both the GRC and Teleradiology Solutions 
provide high value interpretive radiology reporting services legally to practices in 
Singapore using Indian radiologists. The lack of recognition of an Indian medical 
credential in the US market creates a ceiling on skill upgrading, locking the GRC into 
lower value work than their training prepared them for, preventing firm level deepening 
of skills. 
When compared to the less restrictive arena of financial services, the implications 
of the limitations placed on medical services become increasingly apparent. It is not only 
the potential for growth and success that are limited by such restrictions in the medical 
field, but also the conduits available for knowledge transfer, which I have suggested is a 
key mechanism for upgrading more broadly. In high value financial services, such as 
financial planning and analysis, the required educational profile is less specialized, 
requiring a bachelor level degree, although an MBA or Chartered Accountant credential 
may be preferred. However, due to the more generalist education and training in financial 
services, there is a need for significant on the job training. This is where the link between 
the power of credentialism - its ability to set standards and limitations - within a 
particular industry and the specific interfirm knowledge transfer practices that firms 
engage in emerges. In order to provide the training necessary for offshore firms operating 
in the financial services industry, some firms (particularly firms engaged in activities like 
those of Infosys, described below) commonly visit the client site to learn the skills 
required for financial processes - a practice I return to in my discussion of knowledge 
transfer mechanisms below. 
Medical services, on the other hand, require medical licensure, federal and state 
107 
regulations concerning qualifications, insurance, payment, and privacy regulations. These 
requirements in medical services impose more significant barriers for finding qualified 
employees, building trust and credibility, and signing long-term contracts. These 
constraints, and the potential harm of making mistakes in medical care, mean that that it 
takes longer to get the commitment of new customers to work with offshore service 
companies. In order to do business, teleradiology firms must spend significant amounts of 
time to build relationships and trust. This makes short-term trial runs of teleradiology 
services prior to a longer-term commitment impractical. Financial services, on the other 
hand, have fewer hurdles; clients are able to try out short-term or ad hoc projects before 
committing to a multi-year contract. 
While formal post-secondary education may provide only limited preparation for 
employees of offshore financial service firms, employees in the offshore radiology 
industry gain a significant portion of the skill required to provide services through their 
formal educational training, residency, and the credentialing requirements imposed on 
practicing radiologists. Radiologists become proficient in providing services while 
undergoing medical educational training and residency, which provides them with 
Q 1 
necessary experiential and tacit knowledge. Of course, firms providing radiology 
services to clients abroad still need to learn the requirements dictated by law as well as 
the particular style and manner of service delivery that such offshore clients require. 
However, this means that interfirm knowledge transfer is secondary to the credential, 
training, and expertise that the radiologist gains during his or her training. 
A final perceived limitation of note relates to the H-1B visa, which is granted to 
81 Explicit knowledge is easily codified into words and numbers, while tacit knowledge is more difficult to 
express. Michael Polanyi captures the crux of this distinction in his declaration: "we can know more than 
we can tell" (M. Polanyi, 1967, p. 4). 
108 
skilled professionals from foreign countries who work in the U.S. These visas have been 
met with criticism in the U.S. for a number of reasons, among which is the perception 
that this visa is essentially an "outsourcing visa." This critique implies that the primary 
use of the H-1B visa is to facilitate transitions to offshore outsourcing processes. As a 
result of this criticism (and other unrelated security concerns follow 9/11), the availability 
of such visas has been restricted. Although such a restriction could be seen as a potential 
limitation on upgrading processes for workers and firms from developing nations, in fact 
the critique seems to be misplaced and thus the effects of the restriction are limited. As 
noted below, most Indian workers who come to the U.S. to participate in the transition 
process to offshore outsourcing stay for periods of about two months. As a result, they 
typically use two-month long business visas, which are much easier to get approval for 
and take less time to secure. Business visas take approximately three weeks for approval 
in the U.S. (equivalent visas take only one week for approval in Europe), whereas the H-
1B allows for a longer stay but can take up to a year to be approved. 
Bearing the aforementioned restrictions and their implications in mind, then, in 
the following sections I look specifically at the knowledge transfer processes at work in 
first, financial services, and second, teleradiology services. In each section, I focus in turn 
on the specific firms with which interviews were conducted. 
/// . Knowledge Transfer in Financial Services: The Case oflnfosys 
Knowledge Services 
Infosys is one of the largest IT and ITES firms in India and has over 100,000 
employees, most of whom work on IT related projects. Ten percent of the company's 
109 
revenue comes from its Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) business (personal 
interview, Executive, 12/10/08). Within the BPO group there are about 1000 employees 
working in its "Knowledge Services" division and roughly 70 percent of the services they 
provide are skill intensive financial services (personal interview, Manager, Infosys, 
11/23/07). Infosys hires employees such as chartered accountants and MBAs, although 
they also hire some "commerce graduates" that do not have post-graduate degrees. 
Infosys' method of transferring knowledge depends on its clients and reflects the 
company's background in delivering large scale, lower value back office services. 
According to an Infosys Executive, the "clients are involved in knowledge transfer... 
[they] train up people and transfer knowledge" of their systems and processes to the firm 
(Executive, Infosys, 12/10/08). Infosys provides finance and accounting services to a 
broad range of MNCs, but began moving up into more skill intensive financial planning 
and analysis services around 2005. The movement of employees between the client and 
offshore firm is the primary conduit through which knowledge is transferred. This 
approach is used in both lower value and higher value services. Business processes are 
highly specific to a client-firm, developed over time through the interaction of specific 
routines, processes, and the inheritance of "legacy" IT systems and procedures through 
mergers and acquisitions. In order to learn the intricacies of a firm process, a period of 
learning through client visits and training is required; during this period, the offshore firm 
learns client-specific processes. This is necessary even where these processes are later 
improved or reengineered following an offshore transition. 
Infosys BPO uses the traditional "train-the-trainer" approach to transfer 
knowledge, regardless of the skill intensity or the complexity of the work process. The 
110 
company's move into knowledge intensive services grew out of a stepwise movement 
upward from BPO services into the provision of higher-value and more complex financial 
services to one of its large and long-term U.S.-based manufacturing clients. In 2006, 
Infosys formally packaged the knowledge intensive financial planning and analysis 
services it provided this client to other clients as a new service offering. 
Infosys uses a proprietary BPO transition methodology, called "Proton," which 
standardizes the steps required to move a client's services offshore. This methodology is 
applied to KPO client engagements as well as lower skill BPO projects. The task of 
guiding offshored work processes into a "steady state" usually takes two to three years 
out of an average five-year contract, although the actual transition of services from client 
to vendor takes about one year. Throughout the knowledge transfer process, Infosys 
employees manage multiple roles: acquiring knowledge, documenting knowledge, and 
applying knowledge (personal interview, Project Manager, Infosys, 11/29/07). The five 
steps involved for knowledge transfer are detailed below in Table 4.2 (personal interview, 
Project Manager, Infosys, 11/29/07; personal interview, senior manager, Infosys, 1/4/08). 
I l l 
Table 4.2: Infosys Five Stage Project Approach to Process Transition 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
5th 
Stage 
Discovery 
Transition 
plan 
Training 
Parallel 
run 
"Goes 
Live" 
Work performed 
Document client work processes: 
• Infosys engages in close observation (i.e. "shadowing"), 
interviews employees, and reviews materials describing work 
process. 
• Most intensive part of knowledge transfer process, but 
incremental knowledge transferred in subsequent interaction. 
• Send 25-30% of offshore work force to client site for 1 to 2 
months. 
• Relationship building between cross-national teams. 
Create transition plan 
• Codifies information collected during discovery and breaks it 
into smaller employee-level steps 
Offshore labor trained on client work process (i.e. "train-the-
trainer") 
• Transition team returns to India to train the rest of offshore 
team. Each returnee trains 5 employees over 4-week period. 
• Variations in model may be used to reduce loss of tacit 
technical "know-how," during transition and training stage 
Offshore & client teams compare work output for 
inconsistencies 
• Work conducted at the client and offshore locations are 
compared to monitor for quality and efficiency before client 
processes are disassembled, (ex. client and offshore firm may 
run same financial reports to check for irregularities) 
Service delivered exclusively from offshore location 
• Process run exclusively offshore. 
• Offshore team held accountable for terms specified in service 
contract. 
The transition process described in the table above usually takes about a year. 
During this time the client's workers are busy teaching and the offshore workers are busy 
learning work processes. The second year of service delivery is called the "steady state 
stage." Now, the offshore vendor works independently and refines the process to address 
quality issues. During this stage, the client's workers may continue in an oversight role, 
be redeployed to other projects, or be fired. 
An important shift takes place during year three of the relationship. After 
112 
completing a year of successful service delivery, Infosys begins the process innovation 
and improvement stage. This stage has significant implications for our understanding of 
the role of knowledge transfer in upgrading. At this point, the degree of offshore firms' 
dependence on client firms for knowledge may diminish; this can be compared to the 
limited dependence-relationship observed during the outset in the case of Evalueserve, 
discussed in the following section. During this phase, Infosys looks for ways to make the 
clients' work processes more efficient and reduce the number of full-time employees 
required for this work. Although reduction of employees means that Infosys may accrue 
fewer billable hours and therefore less revenue in the short term, the company is not 
concerned about negative effects on its own viability that may follow because, according 
to sources, it is confident that it will get more work from the client in the future (personal 
interview, senior manager, Infosys, 1/4/08). Process improvement and reduction in 
employees dedicated to providing offshore labor occur in two ways: through automation, 
which reduces the workload through technology, or through the deskilling of work (for an 
overview of the deskilling debate see (Attewell, 1987; Braverman, 1974; Form, 1987; 
North, 1990; Vallas, 1990). 
The deskilling process - a process by which the degree of skill or the number of 
skilled people necessary to complete a task is reduced - is described by a senior manager 
in the following way: 
[...] we will pick a piece of work and then we will convert that piece of work into 
such a process that earlier it was 100 people of the same profile running that work 
and then divide that work into 15 to 20 people in the top notch [level] who are 
doing that work in a particular way and another 80 doing [the] low-end piece of it. 
(personal interview, senior manager, Infosys, 11/23/07) 
113 
According to the same source, "the pace of this happening will definitely grow much 
faster [in the future]." Thus, deskilling of knowledge intensive services is a goal for 
Infosys, which this manager sees as becoming increasingly important to "future industry 
competitiveness. The observation that deskilling is occurring in the industry, however, 
does not necessarily preclude upgrading. A firm can move to higher value work, while 
splitting the tasks necessary for upgrading internally into high or low skilled jobs. Yet, 
the recognition that deskilling within the industry is already underway and expected to 
intensify suggests that alienation amongst Indian workers, even within firms or divisions 
specializing in knowledge intensive services, may rise over time. This suggests that 
knowledge workers, who tend to enjoy higher levels of autonomy, are not immune to 
deskilling, which is more often associated with lower value service worker. 
It may seem surprising, given the potential profit motivations that accompany the 
deskilling process, that deskilling occurs only after the transition process is over, rather 
than during the documentation period, when it could be relatively easy to restructure the 
work process. However, the unique structure of knowledge transfer processes during the 
offshoring transition points to reasons why such an approach may be less appealing, both 
for the client and vendor. The potential risk to quality service delivery in the early stages 
of the relationship makes early deskilling too dangerous a proposition for service 
providers and clients, alike. One implication of this variation on a more typical pathway 
to deskilling that takes place in domestic industries is that a greater number of Indian 
workers end up being trained in processes and practices that require higher skills. Perhaps 
inadvertently, the slower development of trust and time needed to adapt to the offshore 
relationships prior to deskilling may limit the potentially deleterious effect of deskilling 
114 
on overall skill and knowledge upgrading in a developing country providing offshore 
outsourcing services. 
IV. Knowledge Transfer in Financial Services: The Case of Evalueserve 
Evalueserve is a research company delivering customized services in financial, 
investment, business, and market research.82 The firm is one of the largest Knowledge 
Process Outsourcing (KPO) companies from India. The central aim of Evalueserve's 
business model is to perform the bottom 70 to 80 percent of the work that a traditional 
investment bank, retail bank, or consulting company does at about one third of the cost. 
The firm does not handle negotiations or do audit work, as US investment and retail 
banks traditionally would, nor does it provide recommendations or implementation 
support, as domestic consulting companies typically would. Even after the global 
downturn, financial services still constitute roughly 40 percent of the firm's total revenue 
(personal interview, Executive, 5/22/09). It has over 2200 employees, including over 
1700 research analysts, most of whom have advanced business or technical degrees; these 
include engineers, MBAs, intellectual property lawyers, medical doctors, PhDs, chartered 
accountants, statisticians and other top-level professionals (Interview, 5/22/09). Among 
these, chartered accountants and employees with MBAs perform most financial services. 
The primary initial source of knowledge for the firm Evalueserve was its 
founders'"education and work experience abroad with top MNCs. In particularly their 
most recent work experiences prior to the formation of Evalueserve allowed them to 
develop and test ideas that they later developed into a plan for new business. 
82 Evalueserve also provides Intellectual Property, Legal Support Services, Supply Chain Support Services 
and Knowledge Technology, but these were beyond the focus of this study. 
115 
Additionally, their knowledge and expertise in providing services to former clients and 
their networks (which include clients) helped them establish themselves in knowledge 
intensive services. This blend of education and experience is evidenced by the 
biographies of the following key figures in the company, including: 
• The Chairman & Co-founder received his PhD in Computer Science from the 
Johns Hopkins University and a Bachelor in Technology (B.Tech.) in 
Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi. Prior to 
the formation of Evalueserve, he served as the Director of Emerging Business 
Opportunities for IBM Research Division Worldwide. 
• The CEO & Co-founder of the company received his MBA from INSEAD, 
France and Masters in Telecommunications from the Swiss Federal Institute 
of Technology, Zurich. He was a Principal with McKinsey & Co, spending 20 
months in the Delhi office in charge of the McKinsey Knowledge Centre. 
• The COO of Evalueserve, who was the company's first employee and was 
designated to be in charge of India's country operations, received his MBA 
from Carnegie Mellon University and a B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering 
from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi. Prior to starting his own 
technology startup, he worked at McKinsey & Co. 
The importance of these founding members' educational backgrounds and work 
experience is tied, in part, to the type of work that Evalueserve engages in. Because of the 
nature of this work, the client-vendor knowledge transfer processes described as central 
to Infosys's practices are less necessary. Instead, having a strong initial basis for both 
knowledge and networks with Western clients, such as McKinsey and IBM, as indicated 
by the brief biographies above, proves particularly important. 
The process for transitioning financial services at Evalueserve is significantly 
different from the process described at Infosys because the scope of work and source of 
data for the work differs. Evalueserve produces customized research that is distinct and 
separate from other client work processes and utilizes public databases or its own 
proprietary databases, rather than the client's databases. Infosys' Knowledge Services 
116 
division, on the other hand, specializes in large-scale projects that usually entail taking 
over a process that utilizes client databases and data. Most of Infosys Knowledge Service 
customers are clients of other "mainstream" Infosys services in BPO or IT services. This 
means that the significant work and coordination that needs to occur to gain access to 
these databases is already done, and Infosys is just adding more analysis to the data they 
may already be working with. This is in fact how the company moved into knowledge 
processes services in the first place, by adding more analysis to the accounting reports it 
was already processing off of an existing client's financial data servers. 
A BPO "transition" involves moving a whole process offshore in a step-wise 
fashion as was described in the Infosys approach above. A senior manager responsible for 
transitioning services explains that "transition" has a different meaning and associated 
practices at Evalueserve: 
So here, the use of the word 'transition' when we use that it means sort of 
working out the scope of whatever activity research that we plan to do with the 
client. . . but nothing actually physically, like a process, actually moves from 
onshore to offshore. It is actually a discrete piece of work. The project could be a 
research piece, could be doing equity research, building a pitch book, it could be 
any of those tasks (personal interview, Chief Transition Officer, Evalueserve, 
2/14/08). 
The fact that the work is distinct and separate from broader client work processes means 
that there is less integration and coordination required between the client and Evalueserve 
for successful service delivery. The research activities that Evalueserve provides are often 
"value adding" activities that are not usually part of the daily business activities of the 
company. One of the primary services the business research division at Evalueserve 
offers, for example, is market analysis, where the firm studies an industry, "analyzing the 
market, market size, [business] drivers, estimates, competition, profiles, key trends, news, 
117 
so on and so forth" (personal interview, manager, Evalueserve, 2/13/08). This type of 
analysis helps executives identify future opportunities and craft business strategies. These 
are important forward-looking functions within the firm, but they are not part of the daily 
work routine that must continue in order to keep the firm functioning. A senior manager 
at Evalueserve estimated that about 30 percent of the firm's projects were collaborative 
efforts, through which it helped the client to figure out a new service or process that was 
to be delivered abroad. Designing these new services is more difficult because the client, 
having no experience in the specifics of the services, is unable to offer a "blue print" to 
base these processes upon. This makes it a more difficult service transition because it 
requires more skill, analysis, and creativity in figuring how to do the work. 
Evalueserve's approach to client service is much less defined than the transition 
process outlined in Infosys's transition methodology above. This is because it is difficult 
to standardize the production of research into series of steps, as is common practice in 
traditional BPO services. Just as adhering to the scientific method does not in itself 
produce useful research, so too is it difficult to follow a specific method in offering the 
types of services in which Evalueserve specializes. A scientists' research may be guided 
by the scientific method, but following the scientific method without additional direction, 
expertise, methodological training, and data, will not provide the scientist with the 
substance and knowledge required to produce and execute a viable research project. 
Evalueserve, then, requires a more flexible and dynamic approach to its service 
provision, which in turn cannot rely on the same sorts of knowledge transfer processes 
Infosys employs. 
In addition, since Evalueserve does not typically use client-supplied data, it 
118 
diverges from a scripted approach to service provision observed at Infosys and other BPO 
projects (Infosys's five step approach described above is a case-in-point of such a 
"scripted" approach). Instead, because it typically relies on public or proprietary 
databases to produce its research, the relations of dependence between Evalueserve and 
its clients diverge from those of Infosys and its respective clients: 
Most of what we do, we use our information sources are publicly available, right? 
So, we are looking at company reports, we are looking at other analyst reports, 
coverage and news, we speak to people, we speak to companies if we are doing 
equity research. So it is much easier actually in some sense to outsource because 
most of what we do we are not using any private data. A lot of what we do, 
actually I would say 95 percent of what we do, uses publicly available data. 
(Chief Transition Officer, Evalueserve, 2/14/08) 
Because Evalueserve uses its own data or public data, the company is much less reliant 
upon learning from the client. In contrast, Infosys employees must learn a number of 
sequential steps from clients in order to gain access to and correctly manipulate data from 
client IT systems. Clients often have old "legacy" technologies and databases that are 
difficult to integrate across the company. This often forces the company, and any external 
service provider, to carry out work in accordance with specific firm and technology 
routines. 
For similar reasons, Evalueserve employees do not necessarily or regularly need 
to visit the client site in order to learn how to serve the client. This is because the work 
tends to be discrete, narrower in scope, and does not require gaining access to or using 
client databases. Evalueserve employees have the autonomy to conduct research in a 
number of different ways that may differ substantially from clients' traditional 
approaches. In a typical BPO set up this may not be possible due to technical or 
organizational constraints that make it difficult to adopt alternative processes. Or, such 
119 
autonomy may be compromised by the clients' desire to exert a degree of control over the 
work process, which is documented in call centers (Lloyd & Payne, 2009) 
While for Evalueserve, it is not standard procedure to have employees visit the 
client site at the outset of a project or longer-term relationship, client visits may occur if 
the client or project requires it. Whether Evalueserve employees visit or not, or when in 
the business relationship these visits may occur varies widely from client to client; 
sometimes employees will never visit a client (personal interview, Asst VP, Evalueserve, 
2/13/08). A long visit for an Evalueserve dedicate team employee is 3 to 4 weeks, which 
is shorter than the typical client visit made by Infosys employees, which again suggests 
that H1B visas are not a necessary route for knowledge transfer in these knowledge 
intensive services. It is noteworthy that Evalueserve employees visit the client later in the 
business relationship, rather than the beginning of the project, which is the norm at 
Infosys and BPO firms more generally. Instead, Evalueserve workers may visit the client 
site to help the client during its annual busy period, rather than to learn a new process that 
will then be moved offshore. Similar to Infosys, Evalueserve finds that these client visits 
help employees become "more attuned" or familiar with the personalities of clients, the 
pressures of their work, and a general sense of the offshore client environment (Asst VP, 
Evalueserve, personal interview, 2/13/08). Yet, the purpose of such visits is quite 
different in the case of Evalueserve, where knowledge transfer may travel in the opposite 
direction from that which takes place in Infosys's case. 
Another significant difference between Infosys and Evalueserve is the scale of the 
client engagement, which has implications for interfirm learning and knowledge transfer. 
Infosys BPO tends to carry out bigger projects; even in the Knowledge Service division 
120 
where projects are smaller, the firm still has projects with up to 300 full-time employees. 
Evalueserve's projects are much smaller, with a five to ten full-time person team 
considered a large opportunity. When dedicated teams start, they are generally two to 
three full time employee teams (Asst VP, Evalueserve, personal interview, 2/13/08). With 
large teams, diffusing client knowledge becomes more complex and difficult and, as a 
result, companies that specialize in larger team opportunities need to have a more robust 
knowledge transfer process. 
V. The Politics of Medical Services Offshore Outsourcing 
Before discussing the practices of knowledge transfer present in the medical 
services industry - specifically the teleradiology industry - it is worth noting the complex 
and controversial context within which firms engaged in these services have been 
operating. By 2000, the U.S. radiology profession faced an acute shortage of qualified 
radiologists, which made it difficult for hospitals and practices to adequately staff 
radiologists, particularly during night and weekend periods when few radiologists want to 
work. Demand for teleradiology services in the U.S. increased due to this shortage 
(Sunshine & Meghea, 2006) (See Tables 4.1 & 4.2) and as a result of other factors, 
including declining reimbursement, increasing demand for services, and the rise of U.S. 
based teleradiology firms (Yee, 2008). While lower teleradiology costs were attractive to 
administrators seeking to cut costs, it was the difficulty in staffing radiologists and the 
proliferation of Internet connectivity globally that made it increasingly possible to solve 
this labor shortage by using radiologists living abroad. 
Despite the increased demand for teleradiology services and the limited supply of 
121 
U.S. radiologists, there were a number of constraints that slowed the movement of 
teleradiology services offshore relative to financial services. One of the biggest 
constraints was public and professional resistance to international teleradiology. 
Off shoring medical services has proven to be a particularly contentious form of 
outsourcing for a several reasons: concerns over service quality, the quality of training 
and foreign credentials, client privacy concerns, international jurisdiction over 
malpractice lawsuits, and perceived threats to the U.S. domestic monopoly over radiology 
services. The rise of Indian teleradiology targeting the U.S. market encountered fierce 
resistance from both inside and outside the radiology profession. This resistance to 
international teleradiology surfaced in the news (Pollack, 2003), books opposing 
outsourcing (Dobbs, 2004), and radiology blog discussions (i.e. AuntMinnie.com). 
Within the profession in the U.S., such opposition was found in guidelines offered by the 
American College of Radiology stating that outsourcing should be limited to U n -
licensed, hospital-credentialed providers with malpractice coverage and, preferably, 
board certification (Thompson, 2004), and at the 2004 Radiological Society of North 
America (RSNA) professional meetings (Thrall, 2004). In addition, each teleradiology 
firm from this study reported receiving "hate" mail. These firms have been caught up in 
political backlash against outsourcing that particularly targeted teleradiology services. 
Fears regarding outsourcing, however, began to recede within the radiology profession 
after peaking in 2003-2004. The primary reason for the decline in concern amongst the 
profession came after the opening presentation at the 2004 Radiological Society of North 
America titled "Outsourcing: Threat or Opportunity?," which argued that there were not 
83 Both Infosys and Evalueserve experienced some resistance to offshoring work from developed markets, 
however, the GRC and Teleradiology Solutions reported much more focused attacks targeting executives, 
employees and high profile customers of international teleradiology services. 
122 
enough U.S. certified radiologists offshore to pose a significant threat to the profession's 
hold over these services in the US domestic market (Thrall, 2004). 
Recent studies of the radiology profession point to increasing adoption of 
independent teleradiology nighttime services amongst hospitals and practices. One study 
found that in 2007, 44% of practices used off-hour teleradiology services compared to 
15% of practices in 2003 (Lewis, Sunshine, & Bhargavan, 2009). A related study found 
that 40% of US radiology practices outsourced teleradiology readings in 2007 and that 
these services constituted an average of 11% of the workload for these practices and 4% 
of the total workload of radiologists nationally (Huffman, Lewis, Forman, & Sunshine, 
2010). Outsourcing of teleradiology has grown, but it still remains a small overall 
percentage of the total radiology workload. The break down between domestic 
outsourced teleradiology and international outsourced teleradiology is not reported in 
available studies. However, Dr. James Thrall, Radiologist and former president of the 
RSNA, estimated that 85 to 90% of outsourced radiology is domestic, which only leaves 
10% to 15% going offshore "to Australia, Israel, a little bit to Europe, a tiny bit to India" 
(Thompson, 2004). The statistics on the growing adoption of teleradiology point to the 
larger issues behind industry resistance to international teleradiology. 
The problem with international teleradiology was not so much about 
"outsourcing," since the use of domestic "nighthawk" services has become common and 
was not a major part of the controversy in 2003-04 within the radiology profession.85 The 
84 In addition, two of the largest domestic teleradiology firms that recently merged suggest that they have 
secured a significant section of outsourced teleradiology work. U.S. based telerdiology companies Night 
Hawk and Virtual Radiologic have a combined 325 radiologists serving 2,700 healthcare facilities across 
50 states, and reading approximately 6 million studies annually (2010). 
85 There were 3 posts on the radiology message board referring to one domestic outsourcing dispute where 
the American College of Radiology (ACR) was asked to intervene (Forrest, 2007). No other controversies 
about domestic teleradiology were uncovered on the message board. 
123 
controversy was also not about "offshoring," since international teleradiology firms 
carried out operations in Israel and Australia for a few years prior to the rise of Indian 
international teleradiology without controversy; these countries' operations did not 
capture much attention before or after the news reports on Indian teleradiology began. 
However, the relocation of offshore teleradiology services to India was part of a 
perceived broader movement of white collar and professional jobs moving to India. This 
movement of jobs abroad, specifically to India, whether perceived or real, remains a 
domestic preoccupation that is often a hot button issue in political campaigns and 
debate.86 Because of its "third-world country" status and the assumptions that accompany 
such a status, Westerners call into question India's credibility as a provider of medical 
services, despite the growing sophistication of medical facilities and training evident in 
the country. 
Thus, the political realties facing Indian-based teleradiology services forced 
companies to adjust their business strategies. Moreover, in their first few years of 
operation, many had difficulties finding, securing, and retaining clients. The GRC and its 
clients faced political backlash substantial enough to lead the firm to scale back plans 
from higher value teleradiology reporting services, deciding instead to focus on lower 
value 3D image processing. 3D imaging does not require an American Board Certified 
Radiologist credential; this decision, then, eliminated competition with the American 
Board Certified Radiologists who exert significant control over the profession. With its 
first customer, Teleradiology Solutions, too, faced controversy over offshoring of 
services to India. This controversy became so contentious that the firm ultimately lost 
86 The subject of offshore outsourcing was vigorously debated leading up to the 2004 Bush-Kerry 
presidential election. 
124 
their initial customer. 
VI. Knowledge Transfer in Medical Services: The Case of Global Radiology 
Centre 
The initial business plan for the GRC was to include offshore radiology reporting. 
However, the inability to find credentialed radiologists to serve the American market 
along with the political backlash directed at Wipro, the GRC's parent organization, and 
their U.S. based customer caused them to scale back the initial plans to offer radiology 
reporting and to focus on the 3D image manipulation instead: 
We started out thinking that we would establish a center for the actual 
interpretation of radiographic studies . . . . So ambitiously we thought we would 
set up our own night coverage service in India because its 12-hour time difference 
and that premise turned out not to be a good one for the simple reason that we 
could not find enough American-trained and Board Certified radiologists who 
were willing to move to Bangalore, and so, having demonstrated that we could 
create a seamless link between Massachusetts and Bangalore . . . . We looked for 
other ways to exploit the technology and that is when we came to the idea of 
training people in India to do the 3D image processing for us (personal interview, 
Chief Radiologist, large multispecialty hospital, 8/27/08). 
3D visualization is a service that is growing in demand because it "enables faster and 
more confident diagnoses and treatment decisions, and quantitative analysis and 
computer-aided detection can provide more accurate and reliable treatment planning, 
staging, and assessment" (Ridley, 2008). According to a Director of 3D Imaging Services 
at a large multispecialty hospital, 3D visualization can "improve patient care, increase 
clinical confidence, and reduce time, cost, and invasiveness" (Ridley, 2008). 3D imaging 
services are growing in demand because they help radiologists diagnose and treat 
abnormalities uncovered in radiology imaging services, such as in X-ray, CT, and MRI 
scans. 
It was not only the dearth of qualified American Board Radiologists in India that 
125 
caused the GRC to abandon the offshoring of radiological reads to India, but also the 
resistance and political backlash targeting the management of GRC and their biggest 
client. Two healthcare executives using the GRC's services received a number angry e-
mail messages, most of them anonymous, urging them to stop outsourcing radiology 
work to India (Pollack, 2003) (Personal interviews, Practice Head, GRC, 10/17/07; 
Radiologist-in-Chief, large multispecialty hospital, 8/27/08). The resistance to radiology 
outsourcing, and the GRC (and Teleradiology Solutions) specifically, was also 
particularly virulent on the radiology message board, AuntMinnie.com. The fact that the 
GRC and its customer were subjected to such angry resistance is somewhat puzzling 
given the fact offshoring of teleradiology from other locations was already an established 
practice. Non-Indian international teleradiology practices were not criticized on the 
profession's message board or in news stories: 
You know, we are not pioneers in teleradiology to be honest. Australia, Belgium, 
Israel, have all been doing it for fifteen, twenty odd years . . . unfortunately for us 
we were stuck in this larger political battle about outsourcing to India where we 
got beaten up badly (Personal interviews, Practice Head, GRC, 10/17/07). 
Clearly many professional insiders had a problem with Indian companies providing these 
services, relative to international teleradiology operations in other developed countries. 
Another primary concern amongst the radiology profession was that "night hawking" 
would turn into "day hawking," thereby increasing radiology competition over daytime 
work. According to Dr. Saini of Massachusetts General, "people want to protect their 
turf, but it's very interesting that that turf battle stops at 5 p.m. on Friday. How many 
people say they want to do this thing on Saturday and Sunday?" (Pollack, 2003). With 
this context of controversy in mind, we can now turn to the knowledge transfer processes 
at the GRC. 
126 
The knowledge transfer mechanism that enabled the GRC to provide 3D Lab 
work to US clients was the training of two Indian radiologists by the client. This included 
subsequent travel to and from the Bangalore based 3D lab and its client. The GRC was 
founded in December 2002. After performing pilot projects for a few months, the firm 
began service delivery at the end of April 2003. The supervising radiologist was the first 
to go onsite, learn the processes, replicate them at the client site to their satisfaction, and 
then return to Bangalore to begin providing those services offshore. As in the case of the 
"train-the-trainer" method used at Infosys, the supervising radiologist used this client-
based training to train other Indian radiologists in 3D lab work. After a year of providing 
services, supervised by the overseeing Indian Radiologist at Manipal Hospital, the GRC 
was performing 1 to 2 images ("protocols") for their client and experiencing some quality 
issues from the client's perspective. 
In 2004 another Indian doctor who had worked at the client's 3D lab joined the 
GRC and helped the firm to improve service quality and expand into the manipulation of 
new types of 3D images. This doctor became the primary trainer for the rest of the GRC 
medical staff. He had received first hand training from the experts at the GRC's main 
client as the new company was forming. Having previously been a research fellow in the 
Gastrointestinal Department of Radiology in the client's research hospital, he decided he 
wanted to move away from research and instead started to learn 3D lab work. In making 
this personal professional transition, he was trained by the client's best technologist in the 
lab for 4 months. He explained, "[Wjhatever protocols she had set, she imparted that 
knowledge to me and I practiced and got good at it and then in about 6-7 months, I was 
127 
like as good as one of the technologists over there" (personal interview, Radiologist, 
11/28/07). 
After a year, the GRC's capacity for 1-2 protocols, MRIs of the head and neck, 
expanded to include 13-14 new protocols, including CT scans of head and neck, stroke, 
and perfusion, which all together constitutes the highest volume of services from the 
client. Quality also improved: 
I knew exactly what they wanted, and how they wanted the image to be, and I just 
replicated exactly the way [technologist name] used to do it over there. That way 
everybody got up to speed with the protocol. . . . quality improved much faster 
once I came back here (personal interview, Radiologist, 11/28/07). 
Quality improvement, according to this source, is difficult because it often relies on tacit 
knowledge that, by definition, cannot be easily conveyed. Thus, the radiologist's direct 
experience of being trained by the client-expert facilitated this improvement, which 
otherwise would have been difficult to achieve. 
Knowledge transfer from a large-multispecialty.hospital was crucial in generating 
client confidence in the GRC's offshore teleradiology capabilities. According to the key 
decision maker at the GRC's client, 
What really facilitated this was we were able to find a key radiologist in India 
who actually came to United States and spent many weeks training to give the 3D 
processes and he then returned to India and shared that knowledge with his 
colleagues. So, in the United States, a technologist typically does this work, but in 
our setup in India, an Indian radiologist actually does this 3D processing, but no 
interpretation is done. Strictly, computer processing (Personal interview, Chief 
Radiologist, large multispecialty hospital, 8/27/08). 
The GRC depended on its biggest customer to teach employees how to provide 3D 
visualization radiology services for three reasons. First, Manipal Hospital, which is where 
the technical labor from the GRC came from, had less exposure to cutting edge technical 
radiology equipment and methods compared to its largest U.S. based customer. Second, 
128 
and more importantly, the Indian Board Certified Radiologists performing 3D 
visualization did not have experience with this work and needed to learn the practice of 
manipulating 3D scans. As noted above, the GRC relies heavily upon using Indian 
certified radiologists who are not trained to in 3D imaging techniques - techniques that 
are typically performed by lower-skilled and less educated technologists. While 
technologists are trained on use of radiology equipment, recognizing anatomy (Barley, 
1986), and image processing, unlike radiologists, they are not trained to interpret the 
images that they help capture and manipulate. Currently there are four Indian radiologists 
and four technologists in the GRC performing 3D scans, but the technologists work is 
audited by the radiologists who supervise them, which further underscores the importance 
of the 3D training for the Indian radiologists themselves. Third, the Indian Board 
Certified doctors also needed to learn how to provide 3D processing in a way that 
conformed to the established practices of their client, which required training from 
clients. 
Once training was complete, the GRC spent multiple months conducting a pilot 
project to ensure quality standards were met. During the initial period the supervising 
radiologist conducted all 3D services, although additional Indian radiologists and 
technologists were hired and trained in subsequent months and after the pilot program the 
supervising radiologist moved into a supervisory role. During the pilot program the 3D 
images were manipulated, but were not uploaded live onto the client servers. Instead, the 
images manipulated in India were checked against the renderings performed by client's 
staff of technologists. This stage began at the end of April 2003 and lasted 6 months. 
Finally, the company took over the night and weekend coverage and began to upload 
129 
manipulated 3D images onto the client's server in real time. The GRC has thus far 
completed over 31,000 cases. 
As the relationships between an offshore vendor and its client develop, and as the 
offshore firm builds upon the knowledge gained through early-on knowledge transfer, the 
direction of knowledge transfer may in fact shift. Though, as noted above the client-
vendor relationship provided crucial support to GRC as its employees gained skills and 
improved the quality of services, eventually knowledge has flowed back to the client. The 
GRC provides its clients with skills and knowledge by helping to train new employees at 
the client site and by providing technologists both onsite and offshore access to the 
advanced medical training of radiologists performing 3D image processing. Hiring a 
person to train new technologists at the client site is difficult for the client because of a 
shortage in personnel, the ongoing workload for experienced technologists, and the 
expense of using onsite labor. As a result, one of the radiologists from the GRC carries 
out the training for new technologists who just joined the 3D lab at the client site 
(personal interview, Radiologist, GRC, 11/1/07). While this arrangement is informal, it 
entails an outsourcing of client training to the GRC, which is already providing night and 
weekend 3D processing. 
The outsourcing of training is superficial, in a sense, because the transfer of 
knowledge from the offshore vendor to the client only applies to inexperienced 
employees who are being trained. In fact, the skills and knowledge that the training is 
meant to impart are skills that already exist at the client site, but are not yet embodied in 
newly hired employees. The main function of the Indian trainer, then, may not be to 
impart "new" or previously unavailable knowledge to the trainees, but rather to be a 
130 
conduit for recirculation of existing knowledge within the client company, that is 
encumbered to do so itself due to personnel or time constraints. Moreover, while the 
Indian radiologist is at the client site for two months for the purpose of training 
technologists, he often learns new approaches that are taken back and disseminated to his 
other teammates in India. According to the GRC business manager, there is a, 
rotational training program of people going abroad and coming back and cross 
training each other. So, it can be a knowledge sharing either ways [sic]. So, when 
some goes there, he may train a fresh bunch of people, but come back with 
knowledge about some enhanced protocols and then share it back here (personal 
interview, GRC, 10/17/07). 
In this case, the exchange of knowledge is seen to be an interactional process that occurs 
back and forth between the client and the vendor, with both learning incrementally 
through the shared interaction. 
The Indian vendor also transfers deeper technical knowledge back to the client by 
providing the client 3D processing performed by formally trained India based 
radiologists. The client's own staff of technologists becomes more effective to the 
client's team of radiologists by gaining access to the clinical expertise of Indian 
radiologists whom they consult and interact with on a recurring basis: 
The majority of the radiologists [at the client site] . . . view the 3D techs here as a 
additional set of eyes, looking at the anatomy . . . the techs here can pick up those 
pathologies and working with the radiologists in India they come trained in the 
anatomy and pathology. They also become very good at picking up those other 
oddities. So, one of the hallmarks, I think in the service reports built here is that 
radiologists can trust that it is not just going to be a pretty picture, its going to be 
clinically relevant and highlight any pathology that might be seen . . . . to develop 
that knowledge on anatomy and pathology, so using the radiologists in India 
really helps them (personal interview, Director, large U.S. multispecialty hospital, 
8/27/08). 
The Indian radiologists at the GRC effectively provide on the job training in anatomy to 
the client's staff, which helps the U.S. based technologists become more effective in their 
131 
job. According to the client, the client technologists become more effective because they 
gain access to the in-depth clinical training in anatomy that Indian radiologists have 
undergone as part of their medical education. 
VII. Knowledge Transfer in Medical Services: The Case of Teleradiology 
Solutions 
The primary source of knowledge for the firm Teleradiology Solutions was the firm 
founder's medical education, training that culminated in an American Board Certified 
Radiology credential, and his subsequent work experience and radiology practice on the 
faculty at Yale. The founder of the company (the "chief radiologist") received his initial 
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor in Surgery (M.B., B.S.) degree from India's top medical 
college, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India. He also 
received his post-graduate training as a resident in diagnostic radiology, from the same 
institution. The chief radiologist then received prestigious internships in the United States 
before beginning his residency at Yale New Haven Hospital, New Haven, CT (1995-
1998). He received his American Board of Radiology Certification in Diagnostic 
Radiology in June 1998. Between 1998 and 2002 the founder worked on the faculty and 
practiced radiology at Yale New Haven Hospital. When he returned to his native India 
for personal reasons he took his education and professional experiences with him. From 
the beginning, the chief radiologist had the skills and the credentials that would enable 
him to provide radiological interpretation to US practices from India, even if getting the 
business established and gaining customer confidence in India as a delivery location was 
more challenging. 
132 
Yale provided the chief radiologist with the option to stay on faculty for a couple of 
years in case he decided to return to the United States. After moving back to India, he 
maintained his U.S. state licensure and his medical appointment at Yale, and remained up 
to date on imaging protocols and practices (A. Kalyanpur, MD, et al., 2004). While back 
in the U.S. during a routine trip to work and teach at Yale, a supervising radiologist in the 
Radiology Department at Yale expressed his difficulty in staffing radiologists during the 
night shift. The chief radiologist volunteered to help out by performing this service from 
India. According to the Teleradiology Solutions founders, this arrangement was attractive 
to the Supervisor at Yale because the chief radiologist was already faculty at the 
University Hospital, which meant they knew he had the qualifications and expertise to do 
the job remotely. In addition, the hospital was confident of the logistical feasibility of 
reporting from India, since the radiologist's current status meant that he already had 
access to the computer system, the Picture Archiving and Communication System 
(PACS), where diagnostic images were stored. Finally, the radiologist's current 
employment status with the institution diminished concerns over privacy and security. 
To increase confidence in a long-term teleradiology reporting from India, the 
chief radiologist and Yale conducted three feasibility studies assessing the technical and 
clinical reliability of sending, receiving, and reading large image files sent from the US to 
India. The first study helped establish the suitability of international teleradiology using 
compression technologies that reduced download and upload time and minimized 
bandwidth usage without impacting the image clarity required for diagnosis (personal 
interview, Founder, Teleradiology Solutions, 1/31/08). A second study tested the 
feasibility and reliability of conducting offshore teleradiology operations from Bangalore 
133 
by comparing the accuracy of transmission of 212 scans from a Bangalore satellite office 
against the same reads from radiology staff member at Yale's emergency room at night. 
The findings demonstrated that teleradiology delivery from India was both technically 
and clinically feasible (A Kalyanpur, Weinberg, Neklesa, Brink, & Forman, 2003). 
With evidence from these studies in hand, Yale began sending 5 to 10 clinical 
cases a day for interpretation to Bangalore, India. In a third study, the founder read body 
CT scans in parallel with faculty at Yale, which demonstrated the clinical efficacy of the 
service already being performed (A. Kalyanpur, MD, et al., 2004). The effect of these 
studies was to help develop the offshore teleradiology business model, provide evidence 
of its efficacy, and to lend credibility to the idea that these services could be delivered 
from India, a developing country. 
Despite performing as well or better than the emergency staff on site,87 within six 
months, offshoring nighttime scans to India became a controversial issue amongst the 
Yale staff: 
The residents would say, oh that study it was reported in India and the faculty 
members would go, "My, we don't have a radiologist in New Haven?" So, there 
was a lot of kind of brouhaha that began to brew within about six months of this 
actual clinical project starting (Personal Interview, Co-Founder, Teleradiology 
Solutions, 1/22/08). 
While the Yale project stopped, the reliability of this model from India was established; 
the founders of Teleradiology Solutions decided to continue the business and began to 
search for new customers. While it was difficult to find new customers, the feasibility 
studies, and the relationship and training background with Yale helped. "Based on those 
[feasibility] studies and the response to those studies, I felt that it was something that 
87 Research studies have shown that radiologists reading scans during the day are more effective than 
nighttime reads in the Emergency reads (A. Kalyanpur, MD, et al., 2004). 
134 
could be of commercial value and that led to the creation of this company and this 
organization" (personal interview, Founder, Teleradiology Solutions, 1/31/08). 
Teleradiology Solutions started in 2002 in a home office in Bangalore, India, with 
2 computers and a single radiologist reporting for Yale (personal interview, Co-Founder, 
Teleradiology Solutions, 1/22/08). By 2004, the company hired another U.S. certified 
radiologist and performed work for 40 clients. In 2010, the firm had 350 employees 
located across the world and examined over 2.6 million scans from 75 hospitals in the US 
and 11 centers in Singapore (Subramanyam & Khan, 2010). Growth of Teleradiology 
Solutions was constrained by perceptions of India's suitability for such high level 
services, legal concerns, and the ability to secure ABR employees in India. Despite this 
difficulty, Teleradiology Solutions was able to secure additional ABRs to work for the 
company, thereby enabling the company to increase it capacity to service US based 
customers. Each of these doctors required minimal technical and cultural training because 
they already had the medical training and credential required to practice. 
Teleradiology Solutions most profitable business is radiology reporting to the US, 
although they also serve other regions, primarily Singapore and India, and are also 
building up their European service offering. As a result, Teleradiology Solutions' core 
business requires the hiring of ABR certified radiologists. There are a total of 13 ABRs, 
and number of Indian radiologists, that are serve over 100 hospitals in the US, Singapore 
and India. All ABR radiologists underwent US residency training and possess an ABR 
credentials. Over half of these American board certified radiologists have Indian medical 
degrees, 3 have US medical degrees, and 1 has a medical degree from the Netherlands. 
135 
Some of these radiologists received additional internships and fellowships in the US or in 
India. 
ABR radiologists tend to stay in the United States, where they are credentialed 
and well paid to practice (starting salary for a ABR radiologists begins around 350K 
annually). The firm has modified their recruitment and staffing strategy from initially 
trying to find ABR radiologists returning to India, to a "global staffing" model that 
utilizes ABR radiologists wherever they are located geographically. Most of the 13 ABR 
radiologists working for the firm are based in Bangalore, or elsewhere in India, such as 
Delhi or Bombay (Mumbai), but some radiologists work in Amsterdam, Beijing, and 
from home in the United States (Interview 40, Executive, Teleradiology Solutions, 
1/31/08). This flexible approach to work has helped the company acquire additional 
qualified radiologists in an industry characterized by labor scarcity (A. Kalyanpur, MD, 
et al, 2004). Despite the firm's ability to secure qualified workers, the firm still invests 
significant resources, time, and infrastructure toward upgrading the skill and knowledge 
level of its employees, including and particularly those with medical degrees. 
VIII. Conclusion 
Knowledge transfer is a key mechanism for upgrading of skills and knowledge in 
the offshore outsourcing industry. This chapter has presented two mechanisms that 
transfer knowledge from organizations in developed countries to organizations based in 
India, which result in skill upgrading. The first mechanism for knowledge transfer is the 
interaction that takes places within client-vendor relationships. This mechanism is 
characterized by incremental learning within the context of relationships, resulting in a 
136 
"slow-and-steady" upgrading trajectory. The second mechanism relies upon the migration 
of technically skilled professionals that result in a faster, "hit-the-ground-running" type of 
upgrading trajectory. Although knowledge transfer is crucial for upgrading of skills, 
certain barriers to upgrading may limit these possibilities, even where knowledge transfer 
is achieved. There are two constraints that influence these upgrading mechanisms. The 
first influences the client-vendor knowledge transfer mechanism, which may be 
constrained by a lack of access to proprietary knowledge, data, methods, processes, and 
systems. The second constraint cuts along professional divisions that are more 
pronounced in certain industries, such as medical services, and less so in others, such as 
financial services. The different routes for skill acquisition combined with structural 
constraints shape the trajectory of firm upgrading. 
In the cases of Infosys and the GRC client relationships with firms in the United 
States provided the primary mechanism for skill acquisition. Infosys moved from finance 
and accounting work in the early 2000s into higher value and more interpretive financial 
planning and analysis around 2005 through a slow-step wise movement that occurred 
through close client interaction and highly integrated process that developed over time. 
Infosys was simultaneously enabled and constrained by its dependence upon client 
knowledge and access to their data, methods and systems. The company depends upon 
clients to learn how to perform and replicate daily client business services and to gain 
access to client databases for each project it completes. As a result, upgrading in this case 
is dependent upon the client's willingness to share knowledge, provide access to firm 
data, and methods. This dependent nature of this relationship mean that there could be 
limits to future upgrading potential. 
137 
Within the context of the relationship between the GRC and a large US 
multispecialty hospital the Indian GRC expanded the breadth of their service offering 
from one type of 3D image of an MRI of the heart to performing fourteen types using 
MRI, CT, and X-ray technologies of a number of organs and body parts. This broadening 
in services unfolded slowly over a 4-year period and was initially constrained by the lack 
of familiarity the GRC had of client processes when it began service delivery in early 
2003. The expansion in service breadth began to accelerate in 2004 when the GRC's 
Indian radiologist, who was initially trained by the client and received additional client 
training during subsequent return visits, shared his deep knowledge of client processes 
and methods with his coworkers. 
Evalueserve and Teleradiology Solutions, in contrast, depend on overseas 
educational background and prior work experience of their founding members and key 
employees for knowledge transfer. Evalueserve acquired most of its operational "know-
how" prior to client interaction, through previous work and educational experience, 
which allowed the firm to move directly into higher value work from its first project. 
When the company began its first project in 2001 it was able to complete the work with 
minimal guidance from the client because the founders worked on similar projects in 
their previous employment positions at McKinsey & Co. and IBM. In addition, the firm 
also used publicly available or it own proprietary data sources as the basis for its 
research, thereby reducing dependence on its clients for learning and data access. 
Teleradiology Solutions, like Evalueserve, relies upon the overseas educational 
background and prior work experience of their founding members and was able to 
provide these services to its first client. Teleradiology Solutions was able to provide final 
138 
interpretations of CT, MRI and X-ray with its first customer from its first day of 
operations. This was because the radiologist provided the same service from India as he 
was trained and had experience performing, while he worked in the United States. 
Legal, political, and professional barriers to certain industries - particularly in the 
medical industry, as my study suggests - mean that even where knowledge transfer has 
occurred - upgrading opportunities in the future may be limited. Nonetheless, it is 
important to also understand the dynamics of knowledge transfer in these more regulated 
professional industries in order to understand opportunities in other professional service 
areas and to better understand the prospects for upgrading in developing countries, and in 
turn the potential for upgrading within the offshore outsourcing industry to fuel industry 
development. 
In medical services, access to credentialed labor in a firm's export market, shapes 
the heights to which a firm can rise into higher value services. The GRC Indian certified 
radiologists and technologists that provide 3D services lack the credential recognized in 
the US healthcare market. While the firm has expanded in breadth of services, further 
upgrading in terms of specialization is constrained by a "credential ceiling." As a result, 
the company has exhausted its potential to move up into higher value professional 
services in the US market, unless it begins hiring US board certified radiologists like 
Teleradiology Solutions. Despite these limitations the GRC does have the potential to 
increase its volume in 3D services in the US, by hiring more Indian credentialed labor 
and finding additional US based customers. Teleradiology Solutions, in contrast, is less 
constrained in further upgrading into other high value radiology services, since it has the 
credentialed labor recognized in the US. 
139 
The lack of a US recognized credential makes the GRC more dependent upon 
client learning and these services are more tightly integrated with client systems and 
work processes than Teleradiology Solutions. The 3D images produced at the GRC are 
used to help radiologists in the US (or elsewhere) make a better interpretation of an 
image and to help them plan appropriate treatment. This means that 3D images are tightly 
integrated into the interpretation of the image itself. To make interpretation easier for the 
client's radiologists, the company is expected to conform its services to fit the clients' 
expectation in form and content. The scans performed by an American board certified 
radiologists, like those employed by Teleradiology Solutions, do not require a secondary 
read by the client, which makes them less integrated with client processes and less 
dependent on their clients for knowledge relative to the GRC. 
These findings on firm mechanisms and their constraints have implications for 
state policy. If the state wants to build a high skilled service industry as quickly as 
possible, this study suggests, the state should focus its effort on enticing technically 
skilled workers to set up business operations in the country. Many developing states, 
including India, encourage "non-resident" citizens, to channel money back into the 
country, in the form of remittances and enticements to buy property. The state, however, 
should also expand upon efforts to help technically skilled labor relocate and establish 
business in the country. Some countries, such as India, encourage "non-resident" citizens 
to establish businesses by relaxing ownership rules around foreign business ownership. 
Yet this study suggests more should be done to entice technical professionals, especially 
professionals who are trained and certified in professional fields based in lucrative 
developed markets, like US credentialed radiologists like those who founded and work 
140 
for Teleradiology Solutions. The relocation of these professionals and the creation of 
professional service firms not only contribute to mdustry upgrading, but can also 
contribute to innovations that shape economic and social development in the country 
more broadly. 
Table 4.3: Number of Job Listings per Job Seeker 
W 
O) 
C 
to o> 
-J o 
si o> 
o CO 
O -y 
i- i_ 
Q O 
E 
3 
4.0 
3.5 
3.0 
2.5 
2.0 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.0 
1 
<£ <*N o> <£> <&• <p <& <& o?> d?> c£ ^ <& cv> o$* c£ 
N # N # N # N<£ & & & N # N<£ N# ^ ^ ^ ^ <f <$> 
From American College of Radiology's Professional Bureau placement service 
during annual meeting of Radiological Society of North America during years 
1990-2005. Gap in line indicates no data for 2001. Source: (Sunshine & Meghea, 
2006) 
141 
Table 4.4: Advertisements for radiologist jobs 
Graph shows actual number of advertisements {vertical bars) per month appearing in 
American Journal of Roentgenology and Radiology from January 1991-December 2005, 
with 12-month rolling average {solid line) calculated to reduce seasonal variation 
Source (Sunshine & Meghea, 2006) 
700 
600-
</> j 
0 500 • 
142 
Chapter 5 
Firm Training Programs: The Construction of Knowledge in Offshore Services 
/. Introduction 
The process of upgrading is traditionally understood in terms of the movement 
from lower to higher value work and the accompanying skill development necessary for 
such movement. However, my analysis of training programs at the firms analyzed in this 
dissertation suggests that we should understand upgrading not only in terms of concrete 
skill development but also in terms of the communication and presentation of firms' 
skills to their clients in developed countries. 
My argument in this chapter examines both of these aspects of upgrading. First, I 
argue that training programs upgrade the technical skills of firm employees by providing 
them with increased exposure to "real world" problems and learning opportunities that 
are underemphasized in Indian higher education. Firm level training programs necessarily 
build upon the knowledge created in the higher education system described in Chapter 3. 
However, they also respond to specific and recognized gaps in the existing education 
system and labor market in India. In the previous chapter, I focused on processes of 
knowledge transfer between firms and clients. Such transfer is insufficient to address the 
knowledge needs of firms; they must also independently create knowledge, disseminate it 
internally to new employees, and upgrade workers' skills. 
143 
Second, I argue that investments in training are important to firms because they 
provide them with credibility, which may be as important as the actual skills firms 
possess. Such investments, both in the outspoken manner of the flashy campus described 
below and in more subtle forms of training, signify to clients that the firm has the ability 
to provide knowledge intensive services to firms in developed countries. For Indian firms 
who face questions about the capacities of developing countries to provide higher-level 
services the assurances that accompany visible training programs are of vital importance. 
The chapter is organized as follows. First, I present three vignettes of firm 
initiatives that highlight the ways in which training programs perform both skill-building 
and image-management functions. These examples point to the intertwined nature of 
these tasks and the difficulties of distinguishing between these two functions even within 
single initiatives. I then discuss these two aspects of training programs in greater depth, 
treating the skill focus and image credibility boosting elements in turn. In discussing the 
skill-based features of training programs, I discuss the factors that make particular types 
of skill development necessary - the ways in which India's knowledge labor force is 
insufficiently equipped both in terms of quality and quantity. I also provide an overview 
of the different approaches to training taken by different firms and across the two 
industries explored in this project. I then further examine the ways in which upgrading 
can be understood not only in terms of skills but also in terms of projection of an image 
designed to garner firms' credibility. 
//. Training Programs: Three Vignettes 
i. Infosys Mysore Development Center 
In 2006, a sprawling 337-acre university campus capable of training 14,000 people a 
year opened in India. Facilities on the campus include Internet enabled classrooms, 
144 
resident dormitories, libraries, a leadership institute, as well as a large spherically shaped 
4 screen movie megaplex, sound studio, recreation room filled with games, an athletic 
center with workout equipment, a massive swimming pool, a rock climbing wall, tennis 
courts, cricket stadium, and seven restaurants, including one "floating" restaurant in the 
middle of a pond. One of the newest buildings is modeled on the Greek Parthenon in 
Athens, although the floor area is bigger. The government did not build this campus. 
Though education is often thought of as a state responsibility in India, this impressive 
campus was built not by the state, but by a single corporation, Infosys. 
The "Infosys Mysore Development Center" is the largest corporate university in 
the world. It symbolizes a growing trend in the Indian IT and ITES industry wherein 
firms invest heavily in employee training and the creation of educational programs. The 
spectacle of the Center, however, signifies more than just an investment in skill 
development. In addition, it points to the importance of such training programs for firms' 
image management. The extravagant appearance of the Center communicates something 
about the capacities and commitments of the firm. 
ii. The Knowledge Olympics 
Evalueserve has achieved a measure of success in creating firm knowledge 
through the creation of a company wide competition designed to foster innovation. The 
"Knowledge Olympics" is designed to help create a number of early stage research ideas 
that can be further developed into research papers or implemented within the company. In 
2006-2007 the firm received 110 concept papers and many of those initial ideas were 
converted into industry research briefs ("white papers") that are distributed to the 
industry and public via its website and public relations efforts, while others have been 
implemented within the company to increase firm efficiency (employee & executive, 
145 
2/14/09). The contest encourages participants to form competitive teams across 
functional, industry, and geographic areas within the company, which helps to span and 
broker internal networks and may help produce new knowledge and skills. 
Some of knowledge created through this program have resulted in a deepening of 
firm skill and have been translated into new service offerings to clients. One idea that was 
first incubated in the Knowledge Olympics found a new way of predicting innovations of 
competitors (employee; Executive, Evalueserve, 2/14/09). The research approach was 
based upon the analysis of multiple databases that uncovered Google's various patient 
applications filed with the U.S. government and these results helped the participants 
predict Google's move into the phone market (Evalueserve, 2007). The research 
approach that predicted the unveiling of the Google phone can now be applied to new 
firms and industries in order to predict new innovations. In this way, the research 
knowledge and skills cultivated in this annual event can serve as testing ground for new 
approaches that can help differentiate Evalueserve in the market. 
In addition to the skills and knowledge that are produced through the "Knowledge 
Olympics," it is significant that research produced internally are then presented to the 
outside world in the form of industry "white papers" via the firms website. Here, 
Evalueserve can demonstrate the innovative work, high-level skills, and productivity of 
its workforce. 
Hi. Rad Gurukul 
Teleradiology Solutions has built a new educational facility with the express 
purpose of helping to address India and South Asia's shortage of skilled labor in 
radiology (See Table 5.1: India & US Radiologists to Population Ratio). In India, there 
are 10 times fewer radiologists relative to the population in the U.S. (Arjun Kalyanpur, 
146 
2008). The radiology training center, called Rad Gurukul, which in Hindi means 
residential training facility run by a tutor, is the first center of its kind in India dedicated 
to radiology and related IT training (Wrong, 2008). The training center is co-located at 
the firm's 5-story office building in Bangalore and contains a university style auditorium, 
complete with sloping stadium seating that can accommodate 100 people, LCD 
projectors, video conferencing equipment, and the capability to host international 
speakers, and broadcasting its lectures for later viewing by the radiology profession. 
What makes Rad Gurukul unique, however, is that it is designed to serve a 
broader audience than just the firm; indeed, it serves to educate individuals from not only 
India, but also the surrounding region. Classes on cardiac imaging and emergency 
radiology have drawn heavy interest. A two-day teleradiology symposium drew students 
from Singapore and parts of the Middle East (Wrong, 2008). The founder of the program 
said he will pursue a recognition program with universities to help serve this broader 
educational role (Wrong, 2008). Rad Gurukul increases skills and capabilities of new 
radiologists, while also helping to disseminate industry knowledge that may help 
radiologists, despite their country of certification, upgrade their skills. 
This farther-reaching educational function has developmental implications for the 
region, but it also plays a role in cultivating the image of the firm and the industry: the 
specter of an Indian firm training radiology students and radiologists who travel from 
outside the country to gain expertise sends a distinctive message about the specialized 
knowledge and capabilities that characterize not only the firm, but also the Indian 
radiology industry more broadly. The message is striking: India is a producer of 
knowledge in this arena. 
147 
Table 5.1: India & US Radiologists to Population Ratio 
India 
US 
Radiologist to Population Ratio 
1 : 100,000 
1 : 10,000 
Data Source: (Arjun Kalyanpur, 2008) 
///. Training Programs as Skills Building 
In order to understand the approaches firms take to training employees, it is 
necessary to examine the needs it seeks to meet within its own workforce and the labor 
pool in India more broadly. Interviews and data suggest that firm training programs 
attempt to address what are perceived to be the inadequacies of Indian labor with regard 
to both quality and quantity. 
/. Insufficient labor quality and quantity 
As discussed in Chapter 2 and 3, India needs reform in higher education to 
increase both the quality and quantity of graduates. This is particularly true in the IT and 
ITES services industries where double digit grow rates have lead to a reduction of skilled 
workers, particularly at the high skill end of the spectrum. In response to a tightening 
labor market and rising wages, Indian software firms sought to upgrade the skills 
employees, rather than hiring a succession of under qualified programmers (Athreye, 
2005, p. 32). Investments in industry wide training has intensified as the offshoring 
service industry in India has grown. According to one study, IT firms provide newly 
hired employees around 60 to 90 days of training, while low-skilled business process 
outsourcing and call centers offer around 15-40 days of training (Wadhwa, de Vitton, & 
Gereffi, 2008). 
Within financial services intensive training is often required within the firm itself 
because the educational system does not produce graduates with practical or industry 
148 
specific knowledge. According to managers at Evalueserve, there are shortages of skilled 
people in the country (personal interview, Executive, 2/12/08; personal interview, VP, 
2/14/08). At Infosys a manager reported that the industry is facing a "talent crunch" 
where chartered accountants, MB As, and postgraduates who tend to have the skills to do 
this work are hard to find (Infosys, Manager, 11/23/07). Indian firms are increasingly 
responding to this skill shortage by investing heavily in training in order to bring the 
skills of graduates up to levels required by industry. According to one executive, "we 
have no choice" because at many universities, the "curriculum does not turn out 
candidates with skills we need" (Menon & Mishra, 2009). The skill shortages reported 
most frequently by industry managers are technical skills, such as financial analysis and 
accounting skills. According to another Infosys executive, "If our universities upgraded 
and made the teaching methods more industry and employment-oriented, the IT sector 
need not spend that much for training" (Special Correspondent, 2008). This lack of skill 
and knowledge in financial services makes it difficult for firms to offer services that 
require those skills. Based on these conditions firms in this position invest heavily in 
training to close the skill requirement gap. 
Firms providing teleradiology services face even bigger obstacles in terms of 
finding qualified workers than those facing financial service firms. International 
teleradiology firms that provide image interpretations must possess medical credentials 
recognized in the state where those services are provided. As noted in the previous 
chapter, finding this credentialed labor source has been difficult to secure at times in the 
United States (Sunshine & Meghea, 2006) and it is particularly difficult to secure outside 
the country, where far fewer professionals reside. This entry barrier for teleradiology 
149 
firms may decrease the incentive for firms to offer additional training in teleradiology. 
Some firms exporting teleradiology services, however, offer intensive training for new 
employees who already possess the required credentials. This training is largely aimed at 
keeping abreast of new knowledge in the field and reducing potential errors and 
inconsistencies in service delivery, which could potentially cost not only a business 
relationship, but also a life. Firms like GRC, which provide lower value 3D imagery 
teleradiology services, are not constrained by the same credential requirements. However, 
paradoxically, the GRC's practice of relying upon Indian radiologists, who are a much 
more highly educated labor force than that used in the US to perform similar tasks, means 
that additional job training is required to teach these employees how to do lower value 
work that their educational and previous work experience tended not to provide. 
ii. Differences between Industries 
There are two broad differences in the skill and knowledge requirements that are 
based on the capability for breadth and specialization within each industry. These in turn 
shape the training requirements of firms. First, deeper knowledge is required in medical 
services relative to financial services. Employees in medical services gain most of their 
technical expertise through educational and residency training and this takes years of 
additional training. Educational training to get a business or accountancy education and 
professional credential is much more generalist, than a highly specialized medical degree. 
Firm level training programs reproduce these differences in training specialization. Initial 
firm level training in radiology at the GRC and Teleradiology Solutions are three to six 
months in duration, while they are around one month long for financial services at 
Infosys and Evalueserve. 
150 
A second difference is that financial services are applicable to multiple industries, 
while medical services are not. This means that in financial services training is developed 
to orient workers toward a specific industry specialization. ITES firms, particularly at the 
high-skill end of their service provision, require in-depth industry knowledge to be able 
to provide services of value to customers. Financial services can be sold to clients in 
multiple industries, but the firm needs its employees to have a depth of industry 
knowledge for each industry it provides services within and training programs at both 
Evalueserve and Infosys help (new) employees learn industry specific dynamics prior to 
on-the-job learning. Medical services, on the other hand are focused within the medical 
professional itself. As result, industry training, when offered, tends to focus on technical 
developments and trends within the field. Most medical training offered focus on 
technical skill developments, rather than industry knowledge. 
Hi. Building Skills in the Financial Services Industry 
Infosys shares some similarities with Evalueserve in its approach to training. Both 
organizations have a month long new hire training program that emphasizes technical 
skills (financials), industry specific training, and soft skills training. The training program 
at Infosys focuses on learning client processes and is characterized by a relatively top-
down educational structure, focused on "real world" application. Evalueserve, on the 
other hand, tries to promote knowledge sharing and knowledge creation within the firm 
through internal programs that foster innovations and "white papers" produced by 
executives and client projects. (See Table 5.2: Comparison of knowledge creation 
approaches in financial services.) 
151 
Table 5.2: Comparison of Knowledge Creation Approaches in Financial Services 
Infosys, Knowledge Services 
Core services: Financial planning & 
analysis 
Skill requirements: Analytical skills and 
in-depth financial literacy 
Employee profile: 1000 highly skilled 
workers; MB As, chartered accountants, 
engineers, statisticians & economics 
graduates 
Training Model: 
"Right skilling": Hire "under" qualified 
employees that require additional training 
New Hire: 
• 1 month: technical and industry 
background training 
Continuous education: 
• Online training tutorials 
• Client specific training 
Evalueserve 
Core service: Business & Investment 
reporting 
Skill requirements: Analytical & research 
skills, in-depth financial literacy 
Employee profile: 1700 research analysts; 
engineers, MBA's, intellectual property 
lawyers, PhDs, chartered accountants, 
statisticians 
Training Model: 
Hire best employees in technical areas and 
provide additional training 
New Hire: 
• 1-month: functional training (i.e. finance 
fundamentals, excel modeling, etc) and 
industry specific training (i.e. oil & gas, 
financial service industry) 
Continuous education: 
• Monthly knowledge sharing sessions 
• Online training tutorials 
Financial services include a number of services from more transaction and rule-
based services, such as order processing, accounting, indirect procurement, payment 
processing, fixed assets, general ledger accounting, and reconciliation, to higher value 
services that require more interpretation and judgment, such as financial analysis, 
financial management, and financial reporting. In moving from the former to the latter, 
Infosys has shifted emphasis away from more general financial skills, proficiency with 
Excel, and other bookkeeping software programs that permit in-depth reporting and 
analysis toward the development of more interpretive skills and in-depth knowledge of a 
specific industry segment or of the particularities of a specific client. 
152 
Over time, training at Infosys has moved from a theory-focused program toward a 
more problem-solving oriented approach. A case study approach helps employees 
understand how to approach specific problems in an effective manner (Executive, 
Infosys, 12/10/08). This makes training more applicable to the business needs of 
customers and compensates for the problems identified in the education system, which, as 
noted above, tends to focus on rote memorization of concepts rather than application or 
practical problem solving skills. 
Infosys's employee training capabilities are tightly integrated into its hiring 
practices, which it calls "right skilling." Through this process the company defines the 
four or five key skills required for a given process and then hires people who demonstrate 
a basic background in those skills, yet still require further training in order to become 
competent (Director, 4/23/09). This strategy was adopted because lower skilled 
employees are easier to find in the labor market and less expensive to hire. However, the 
"right skilling" hiring and training strategy is also a retention strategy, which reduces the 
chance "over" qualified employees will lose interest in the work and leave (Director, 
4/23/09). The concern over employees becoming bored with the work suggests that even 
within knowledge services work may be narrow in scope and potentially repetitive. What 
is particularly noteworthy is that a "right skilling" training and hiring approach would be 
impossible to pursue in high-end medical services due to the higher degree of 
specialization, the way skills have been defined by the profession, and the credential 
requirements. A technologist cannot be transformed into a radiologist with additional 
firm level training, although the reverse is possible, as the GRC case demonstrates. 
153 
At Evalueserve, the training of employees occurs in one of three ways. The first 
type of training is a one-week orientation program for new hires where they learn a 
general overview of the company. The second type of training seeks to get newly hired 
graduates to learn the fundamentals about the specific industry domain they will be 
working in. After employees are hired according to specific educational backgrounds that 
the firm seeks (i.e. MBA, Chartered Accountant, etc) are put into a training process, 
which familiarizes themselves with the specifics of their future projects. Each employee 
goes through a three-week training program composed of classroom trainings and 
exercises where their performance is assessed (personal interview, Asst VP, 2/13/08). 
Industry "vertical training" also helps workers learn trends in specific industries such as 
pharmaceutical, oil and gas, financial services, Fast Moving Consumer Goods and 
knowledge of the industry (personal interview, Executive, 2/12/08). 
The third type of training, which most distinguishes Evalueserve's approach from 
Infosys's approach, occurs through internal knowledge sharing sessions and through 
online training modules. Knowledge sharing sessions are hosted once a month where 
teams discuss different types of projects or share insights about new things they have 
done (personal interview, Asst. VP 2/14/08). These knowledge sharing sessions are 
oriented toward sharing of tacit knowledge of tasks that are difficult to share through "E-
learning modules," which communicate more explicit forms of knowledge. 
One way of arriving at a better understanding of Indian ITES firms' training 
programs is to compare them to the training US workers typically receive. Indian 
companies do share many similar approaches to those employed by Western companies, 
but they appear to be investing more heavily in terms of dollars and portion of overall 
154 
employee time spent in training relative to the US workers. Indian companies are able to 
invest more heavily in relative dollars because it is less expensive to run training. At 
Infosys the $6000 investment in employee training would cost $50,000 for an equivalent 
amount of training in the US. The training in India costs about an eighth of US cost, 
which makes it more affordable. The fact that Indian workers in IT and ITES tend to 
work longer hours than average working hours of both US and European labor forces also 
enables firms to dedicate a larger percentage of employee's time toward training, without 
significantly impacting overall worker productivity. Evalueserve employees spend 8 to 9 
percent of their time working on continuous training. 
A recent study found that US workers spent an average of 35.06 hours in formal 
training and organizations in the top tier of employee hours devoted to training averaged 
44.34 hours in 2006 (Paradise, 2007). According to data from the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (2009), Americans worked an average of 
1,768 hours a year in 2009. Using the US average hours as a basis, American workers are 
spending an average of 2 percent of their time in training, while workers at training 
intensive firms spend 2.5 percent of their time in training. 
Therefore, Evalueserve employees are spending over 3 times as much time in 
formal training as American workers. A recent study of the IT and ITES industry suggest 
Indian workers tend to work longer hours, often 9 to 12 hour days, including Saturdays, 
which is more than the US counter parts at client organizations based in the United States 
(Nadeem, 2011). The higher total hours of work suggests that Evalueserve employees are 
spending more hours in training than Americans even if the percentage of training to 
overall hours was held constant. 
155 
iv. Building Skills in the Medical Services Industry 
The training approaches for GRC and Teleradiology solutions share some 
similarities, however they diverge sharply in terms of continuing education. The reasons 
for these different approaches to training are due to the different niches that these firms 
occupy. Paradoxically it is higher value Teleradiology Solutions that invests heavily in 
long-term training, while the GRC does not. Professional access and credentials shape 
firm incentives to train employees and the ability for employee and firms to upgrade 
subsequently. Both firms have new hire training that is up to six months in duration, but 
the training serves different functions at each firm. At the Teleradiology Solutions, 
training enhances the technical training that radiologists underwent through medical 
training and residency. At the GRC on the other hand, the training is crucial for 
reorienting the Indian radiologists toward 3D image manipulation, which they have not 
been trained in. 
156 
Table 5.3: Comparison of Knowledge Creation Approaches in Medical Services 
Global Radiology Center 
Core service: Manipulation of MRI or CT 
scan from 2D to 3D image 
Skill requirements: Manipulation of 
technology to produce clinically relevant 
images 
Skilled Employee profile: 
4 Indian certified radiologists & 4 
technologists 
Training Model: 
Hire "over" qualified employees that 
require low levels of long-term training. 
One-on-one mentorship, few formal 
resources. 
New Hire: 
• 3 months for radiologists, 6 months for 
technologists 
Continuous education: Unstructured 
• Technical learning opportunities at 
parent hospital 
Teleradiology Solutions 
Core service: Radiology reporting 
Skill requirements: Interpretive ability to 
assess abnormalities in imaging technology 
Skilled Employee profile: 
13 US ABR Radiologists + Indian 
certified radiologists 
Training Model: 
Hire certified radiologists and provide 
"academics" 
New Hire: 
• 6 months before unsupervised 
interpretation. 
Continuous education: "Academics" 
• "Journal club" 
• Internal professional presentations 
• Weekly review of difficult/problem 
cases 
Rad Gurukul - founding of a regional 
radiology training institution 
The GRC's hiring and training approach is diametrically opposed to the strategy 
adopted by Infosys. Rather than hiring "under" qualified candidates that require further 
training, the GRC hires "over" qualified Indian radiologists. At the GRC Indian certified 
doctors perform nearly half of the 3D enhancements coming into the center and review 
all 3D work going abroad. The GRC also employees technologists who have equivalent 
qualifications to US based technologists, but all of their work is reviewed by an Indian 
board certified doctor before being sent to US based clients. The much lower costs of 
Indian doctors enable the GRC to employee highly educated labor, relative to 
157 
technologists used exclusively in the U.S. The lower costs also enable an additional set of 
eyes to check the quality of 3D imagery. 
Continuing education approaches differ dramatically. After completing the initial 
training process at the GRC, employees may gain additional clinical exposure under the 
senior radiologist at the adjacent parent hospital. However, these continuing education 
opportunities appear to be the exception, rather than the rule. The continuing training 
opportunities are not required, are unstructured, and the onus is on the employees 
themselves if they want to further upgrade their skills. Rather, the emphasis on training 
over time at the GRC tends to be client-centric, where employees slowly learn new client 
processes over time (See chapter 5 on mechanisms for knowledge transfer). 
At Teleradiology Solutions on the other hand, continued training, commonly 
referred to as "academics," is compulsory and occurs on a weekly basis. The firm's co-
founder tries to replicate the academic environment he was trained in, while also 
disseminating the knowledge he and other radiologists have gained through their varied 
experiences and training. "Academics" at Telereadiology Solutions include presentations 
by rotating radiologists on new developments in the field every Wednesday evening, 
"brown bag" lunch review sessions of difficult or novel cases 3 times a week, and 
occasional industry symposiums (personal interviews, Director of Quality, 1/31/08; 
Founder, 1/22/08). These activities keep radiologists attuned to recent developments in 
technology and methodologies in the field and ensure that knowledge within the firm is 
constantly circulated. The Director of Quality at the firm credits "academics" with 
drastically improving the service quality of the firm over time (interview, 1/31/08). 
158 
The major explanation for the divergence in the GRC's approach to continuous 
training and Teleradiology Solutions's are the lack of overall upgrading opportunities that 
are presented to the firm. The GRC has few opportunities to move up, which makes 
additional training more of a benefit to employees than a strategic imperative. At 
Teleradiology Solutions, in contrast, they have continued opportunities to expand into 
high value services and continued training is a key component of firm strategy. 
The GRC invests less heavily in long-term training relative to Teleradiology 
Solutions, for two reasons. First, the GRC already employees higher skilled and more 
highly educated labor than employees performing these services in the US, which means 
that additional technical training will have diminishing returns both in terms of technical 
ability and credibility. Second, the company does not have an added incentive to teach 
the employees new skills if workers are already proficient in the services they provide to 
their customers and their are limited opportunities to move into more specialized tasks. 
This reflects the more commoditized nature of the service the GRC provides relative to 
Teleradiology Solutions. 
IV. Training Programs as Image Management 
The foregoing section described the many different tools and approaches firms 
use to build the skills of their employees. While techniques vary between firms and 
between industries, overall the goal is to be able to deliver high-level, knowledge 
intensive services to offshore clients. In order to achieve this goal, however, firms also 
engage in "image management." While they do this in a variety of ways, some of which 
are describe elsewhere in the dissertation, the training programs themselves serve such a 
159 
function. Firms attempt to build their credibility by making visible to clients the training 
they provide; thus, the setting, structure, and products of various training programs are 
manipulated to send a message of expertise and capacity to clients. 
The first of the vignettes in the second section of this chapter presents a 
particularly stark example of impression management. Why does the Infosys campus 
appear to be so over-the-top, almost ostentatiously displaying its features to the world? 
The Infosys Mysore Development Center not only trains the firm's employees, but it is 
also part of the management's strategy to project its knowledge and skills capabilities to 
both current and potential customers and its own employees through its education and 
training efforts. 
Touring the corporate university campus makes one feel as if they are 
simultaneously on a university campus, at Disneyland, and at Club Med. It leaves one 
with the perception that if the company can create a place such as this, just imagine what 
can they achieve in business. The founder of Infosys, Narayana Murthy, justifies the 
expenses on training, which is over $175 million a year (Interview, 12/10/08), and on the 
lavish accommodations of the Mysore training facility specifically by referencing the 
perceptions it has on clients: 
We saw a world-class training facility that could impress our clientele as a 
necessity of the times. Many of our clients stay at the Mysore campus when they 
visit us and it is important that they take away a positive view of the company 
(Menon & Mishra, 2009). 
Here the training facilities at Infosys are clearly doing more than just building the 
capability of its workforce, but also communicating the firm's capabilities to prospective 
and existing clients. The company also has full time staff members dedicated to 
showcasing the campus to visiting guests, some of whom drive visitors around in a golf 
160 
carts to allow them to experience the facilities, see the sights, such as the seven sex-
segregated dormitories that spells out the word "I-N-F-O-S-Y-S." The campus is clearly 
engaging in impression management, using the educational facility to build the Infosys 
name brand, by displaying its approach to employee training and education. Yet Infosys 
also communicates its skill capacities through media to manage to prospective clients that 
have not yet visited the Mysore campus. Fortune magazine's 2006 story "Harder than 
Harvard" details the selectivity and rigor of the Infosys's training facility in Mysore 
(Schlosser, 2006). In this case, the impression management extends beyond the 
boundaries of the campus, to target the company's target customers, business 
professionals in the US. 
Infosys' approach to training also communicates a broader message about firm 
capabilities and the firm's philosophy behind training, part of a larger firm narrative that 
portrays private industry intervening in education to compensate for the government's 
shortcomings. Adding to this perception, President Sonia Gandhi, whose political party 
leads the current government, inaugurated the 1.44 million square foot mega training 
structure on the Infosys campus (Menon & Mishra, 2009), further demonstrating the ties 
the firm has to political elites, the influence they command over politics, and the media 
attention they get through their training efforts. 
At Evalueserve, white papers demonstrate the innovative work, high-level skills, 
and productivity of its workforce. The team-level knowledge sharing sessions and cross-
functional team interaction through initiatives, such as the "Knowledge Olympics," help 
create firm innovations that are captured in the "white papers" the company produces. 
88 5% of newly hired employees don't pass the final exams at the Mysore training facility and do not 
continue their employment with Infosys (Head of Mysore Learning Centre, 12/15/08). 
161 
The key purposes of these industry "white papers" is to establish its authority as a source 
of knowledge and to build firm credibility in "knowledge processes outsourcing." This 
research is distributed through its website and through its Public Relations department to 
establish itself as a source of expertise, but also to cement its claim that it has knowledge 
and skills in the first place. 
Teleradiology Solutions helps to build its clinical credibility through its training 
program, that it calls "academics," and through the construction of its regional radiology-
training center, Rad Gurukul. In particular, the website for the Rad Gurukul helps 
promote the "academic" image Teleardiology Solutions seeks to promote. It does this by 
providing access to many of the firm's continued training programs including tutorials, 
archived pictures and analysis of difficult review cases, summaries of journal articles 
covered by the "journal club," and notices of academic presentations hosted at the center. 
The public displays of these activities, on the Rad Gurukul website (RadGuru.net), linked 
from Teleradiology Solutions and independent industry media coverage, help signal the 
knowledge capabilities of the firm to clients and potential employees. 
The GRC, differs from the other three cases in that it signals its credibility 
primarily through the hiring of "over" qualified personnel, rather than its approach to 
long-term training. After initial new hire training, training become less important for the 
GRC relative to the other cases because the credibility of the labor is established, through 
the much higher education and professional training, relative to US based technologists. 
The GRC's manager, commenting on the role the educational profile of the center's 
workers play in building firm credibility, said "It is a bunch of doctors, but you will be 
selling their credibility [emphasis added] (Manager, GRC, 10/17/07). From this quote, it 
162 
is clear that the doctor's credibility was the primary point of differentiation to the GRC's 
customers. The GRC has the labor to provide a high level of service quality to its 
customers and with few, higher value opportunities, there are limited incentives to further 
develop their long-term education program, since their credibility and quality of their 
processes are already high. The GRC's approach stand in contrast to Teleradiology 
Solutions, which needs to consistently reassure prospective customers that the firm has 
the expertise to provide high quality services from India. Teleradiology's Solution's Rad 
Gurukul training center and website are crucial in signaling this technical capability. 
V. Conclusion 
This chapter has focused on firm level practices in training and knowledge 
creation as well as the importance of signaling the possession of those skills to overseas 
clients. Training programs upgrade the technical skills of firm employees by providing 
them with increased exposure to "real world" problems and learning opportunities that 
are underemphasized in Indian higher education. Firms also independently create 
knowledge, disseminate it internally to new employees, and upgrade workers' skills. I 
also argue that firm training and knowledge creation efforts are simultaneously important 
in upgrading firm skills and in producing credibility in those skills. The perception of 
skills is particularly important in services, which are harder to measure and define 
relative to manufactured commodities, and where those perceptions determine service 
quality. The investments in training programs that result in skill upgrading are not just an 
end, but also the means by which firms project that capability. Firm efforts in skill 
upgrading also build the companies credibility in providing knowledge intensive services. 
163 
All firms in this dissertation demonstrate their technical capabilities through 
investments in training. Three firms in particular - Infosys, Evalueserve, and 
Teleradiology Solutions - projected the learning that occurred through training and their 
efforts at knowledge creation to increase skill credibility. The training strategy for each 
firm grew out of the skill deficiencies in the labor market and produced by the 
educational system, however, firms responded differently even within the same industry. 
Teleradiology Solutions and Evalueserve both provided more continuous training and 
knowledge sharing opportunities that disseminated knowledge within the firm through 
formal and informal channels. Teleradiology Solutions used interactive journal clubs and 
an internal rotational radiology speaker series to achieve this goal, while Evalueserve 
used knowledge sharing sessions within divisions and formal initiatives, such as the 
"Knowledge Olympics" to circulate and combine knowledge in new and innovative 
ways. For Infosys and the GRC the training was deeply integrated into the hiring 
practices, but diverged in opposite directions. Infosys, through its "right skilling" 
approach, hired under qualified employees that required additional training, while the 
GRC, due to concerns over the credibility of Indian medical professionals in the US, 
hired over qualified labor that required low levels of continuous training, especially since 
opportunities in higher value services were limited. Finally, firms also signaled their skill 
and knowledge capabilities through various means. Infosys communicates its technical 
capability through its expansive and lavish training infrastructure, Evalueserve through 
its "white papers," distributed to clients and news sources, and Teleradiology Solutions 
through its "academics" and the formation of its radiology training center, Rad Gurukul. 
In the chapter that follows I will take a closer look at how firm level training, along with 
164 
client interaction, teach service employees to provide services in a manner that is credible 
to overseas clients, drawing upon skills that were first developed under colonialism 
165 
Chapter 6 
Cultural Labor & Industrial Upgrading 
/. Introduction 
In 2004, in the midst of an intensification of offshore outsourcing of services from 
Western firms to developing countries, U.S. based Dell Computers reversed its practice 
of routing customer service calls to India-based call centers. During 2008 and 2009, 
AT&T, Citibank, Delta Air, and United Airlines also relocated call center operations 
from India back to North America. In all five of these high profile cases American 
consumers were dissatisfied with the customer service provided by Indian workers 
(Castro, 2003; Prada & Sheth, 2009; Thibodeau, 2005). However, what constitutes 
"good" customer service is rooted in cultural norms that vary geographically. These 
company experiences demonstrate that declining customer satisfaction with services 
moved offshore can erode offshore labor cost savings and threaten future earning. It also 
suggests that industry development requires cultural skills, not just technical and 
managerial skills. 
While Dell, AT&T, Citibank, Delta Air, and United Airlines' experiences were 
high profile, and outsourcing is often associated with low-level services like those 
performed in call centers, related issues in knowledge intensive work blur this distinction. 
In this chapter, I argue that successful industrial upgrading in service exports relies upon 
the learning of specific interactional skills, attitudes, and approaches to work that are 
specific to the culture of one's customers. I refer to the management of these skills as 
166 
"cultural labor," a category that is analytically distinct from more generalized technical 
and interactional "soft" skills.89 Cultural labor requires the learning, adoption, and 
deployment of specific cultural repertoires that meet the cultural expectations of 
customers. In order to be successful in service exports, firms based in developing 
countries must assimilate workers toward an American or European business culture in 
order to provide services in ways that are consistent and understandable to Western 
clients' own cultural standpoint. This insight helps extend Amsden's concept of 
knowledge-based assets, adding a firm level cultural capabilities alongside the technical 
and managerial skill requirements for industrial upgrading. 
This chapter is organized into seven sections. In the following section of the 
chapter I situate the particular skill requirements service exports into three bodies of 
literature that theorize skills: post-colonial theory, sociology of work, and cultural 
sociology. Next I explain that the global shift toward service work, India's leadership in 
this sector, and introduce the Indian firm cases analyzed in this chapter. Third, I elaborate 
the theory of cultural labor, exploring how the theory helps us to make sense of the links 
among culture, skills, and action in cross-cultural interaction. I then turn to an analysis of 
the cultural challenges firms face in intercultural business transactions and the 
mechanisms they have turned to in order to surmount these challenges. Next, I analyze 
firm level mechanisms used to produce cultural laborers through firm training programs. 
In the penultimate section, I identify how these teachings and the constraints of the work 
process itself may ultimately hinder cultural labor and deployment of the very cultural 
repertoires taught in firm trainings. I conclude by highlighting how cultural labor may 
89 The term "cultural labor" used here should not be confused with labor in creative industries, such as art 
and media. 
167 
become a more generalized skill in the Indian industry context and to other countries 
seeking to enter the service export market. 
//. Industry Development, Skills, and Culture 
Three schools of thought shed light on the question of what specific skills are 
required for industrial upgrading in high value global services. First, post-colonial theory 
highlights that the construction of skills occurs within broader relations of power. The 
colonial system perpetuated binary conceptions between the Orient and Occident, noting 
that these relations were "constitutive;" one could not occur with out the other (Said, 
1979). Within these relations, skills too, were also constructed particularly through the 
practice of education, which reproduced and perpetuated inequality and differences 
between the Colonized and Colonizers. According to Homi Bhabha, the colonial project 
was never to liberate natives, but rather to reproduce the colonized as "almost the same 
but not quite/white" (Bhabha, 1994). During the colonial period the British wanted to 
teach Indian subjects to behave like a British citizen, but the Indian would never actually 
be British. In a similar fashion, the ITES industry is characterized by skill upgrading that 
rests in part upon training that produces modern day "mimic men"; workers who emulate 
western business practices that approximate those performed by their western clients. 
Firm training programs, and increasingly the post-colonial educational system as it is 
reformed to integrate soft skills and cultural sensitivity training, are playing a role similar 
to those of colonial schools that produced the colonial subject. However, it is the workers 
and managers in businesses located abroad, rather than the colonial state that identify the 
cultural deficiencies of Indian workers. A consistent "problem" identified with Indian 
168 
workers, according to western clients and increasingly Indian managers, is a "culture of 
deference" (Nadeem, 2011), or an inability to assertively resist unrealistic client 
demands. This is one example of how essentializing characterizations persist in 
contemporary global work spanning east and west. While Indian workers are often seen 
as overly "deferential," deference points to structures of power that are not unique to 
India. For example, retail sales work within China found deference to be a common 
behavior toward customers (Hanser, 2008). 
The literature on the sociology of work articulates the non-technical interactive 
skills and emotional management required for service work (Hochschild, 1983; Wharton, 
2009). Work in this tradition recognizes that the manipulation of emotions is required in a 
wide variety of "interactive service work" (Leidner, 1993). Arlie Hochschild, in 
theorizing her influential emotional labor concept, recognized that culture influences 
emotional displays in service work and that some groups may regulate their emotions 
more than others (Hochschild, 1983, p. 57). However, culture may not simply impinge 
upon emotional expressions as Hochschild claims, but they can also be manipulated and 
managed in work, just as emotions are. Cultural behavior, scripts, and tropes are 
culturally specific and vary across geography and time, yet they can also be learned and 
deployed strategically within the context of differing work environments. 
Scholars working within the sociology of work also highlight, often critically, the 
role "soft skills" play in hiring preferences, management, and job competence in service 
work (Moss & Tilly, 1996).90 The definition of soft skills varies, but one study defines 
them as the "skills, abilities, and traits that pertain to personality, attitude, and behavior 
rather than to formal or technical knowledge" (Moss & Tilly, 2001, p. 44). This 
90 For a critical overview of the soft skill concept see (Lloyd & Payne, 2009). 
169 
conception, however, conceives of soft skills as a broad residual category that contains 
diverse behaviors such as general business skills and etiquette, communication skills, 
embodying a certain approach to work, and understanding the norms associated with 
clients' culture. I argue that "cultural skills" are analytically distinct from soft skills, as 
well as emotional labor described above, even if in practice the three may be deeply 
intertwined and difficult to separate in practice.91 When used in the analysis of cross 
cultural labor, the broad category of soft skills does not adequately take up the relations 
of power, learning processes, and tensions between cultural norms that are specific to this 
context. Although the role of soft skills in low-wage services has been highlighted by 
scholars focused on work (Grugulis & Vincent, 2009; Moss & Tilly, 1996; Pager, 
Bonikowski, & Western, 2009), few studies focus on these skills in an international 
context (Otis, 2008) or analyze these soft skills in high skilled services. This lack of 
scholarly attention to the role of soft skills in international contexts means that definitions 
of soft skills fail to theorize the unique cultural interpersonal skills that are central to the 
international trade of service work. 
Third, a body of theory focuses on how culture shapes skills as individuals 
respond to their external environment (Bourdieu, 1977; Swidler, 1986). Bourdieu's 
concept of habitus provides insight into culturally-based skills by explaining how 
individuals within a given culture share an understanding of the tacit "rules of the game" 
(Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992). Swidler, critiquing the habitus concept, argues that the 
concept implies that skills are more or less unitary to a given culture (Swidler, 2008). If 
this critique is valid, then applying the habitus concept in an intercultural work 
91 Asaf Darr analyzes technical sales work and finds that technical and social skills are intertwined and 
interdependent (Darr, 2006), thereby blurring the boundary between technical and social skills. 
170 
environment suggests that workers must learn a new habitus to augment or supplant an 
existing one. However, the actual culturally based skills learned or adopted may be 
narrow in scope and deployed strategically in specific work contexts, rather than deeply 
rooted in one's cultural identity, guiding action in multiple arenas, or diffused throughout 
society. Yet, the more unitary nature of a habitus is less of a problem than Swidler's 
critique may suggest for two reasons. First, the habitus is not necessarily coherent and 
unified, but may contain varying degrees of integration and tension (Wacquant, 2004). 
Second, the habitus is always oriented toward a particular field (Bourdieu, 2000). This 
means that the habitus may be internally varied even while oriented toward a specific 
field of international business services. 
Swidler's "tool kit" model of culture offers a complementary perspective for an 
analysis of intercultural work environments. On her account, culture is a resource, or a 
repertoire of skills that directs individuals' action (Swidler, 1986, 2001). Skills provide 
the major link between culture and action and are composed of "habits, practices, and 
other 'cultured capacities,' such as intuitive capacities for perception and judgment, that 
have to be learned and that people can't perform with confidence unless they get 
reasonably good at them" (Swidler, 2008, p. 616). For Swidler, individuals draw upon 
conflicting cultural motifs to guide their action. Yet individuals operating within an 
environment with highly differentiated cultural motifs face compounded challenges, 
especially when that interaction is expected to produce collaborative work. Swidler's 
theory does not explicitly address the challenges that arise when multiple cultures are 
involved in guiding individual action. Cross-cultural collaborative work is guided by 
differing cultural skills and interpreted through different cultural logics and schemas. 
171 
This may introduce novel variation into the work process leading to innovation, but it 
simultaneously increases the chances of cultural misunderstanding between workers of 
differing cultures, which may lead to a breakdown in collaborative work processes. These 
cultural misunderstandings, aggregated to the firm level, threaten the confidence in firm 
capabilities and stymie opportunities for industrial upgrading. The "cultural labor" 
concept presented below will synthesize the "tool kit" model of culture with the habitus, 
by differentiating specific behaviors along a cultural repertoire continuum ranging from 
surface to deep acting. 
///. Theorizing Cultural Labor 
i. Variations in Skills: Call Center Workers and Knowledge Workers 
A variety of offshore service workers ranging from call center agents to 
knowledge intensive service professionals are expected to embody a Western approach to 
work. Call center workers servicing western clients are required to learn a number of 
distinct cultural skills, scripts, and behaviors in order to mimic the communication style 
and cultural expectations of their customers and mask their national identity from 
overseas customers. The specific behaviors include "accent neutralization"; adopting an 
anglicized name (i.e. Suresh becomes Stephen); ability to engage in local small talk (such 
as the local weather, news, sport teams, etc); and evading questions about the call centers 
true location or the employee's citizenship (Nadeem, 2009; Poster, 2007). Yet, the depth 
at which cultural skills are enacted and embodied depend upon the labor process. 
In general, lower value interactive service work requires more surface acting than 
higher value service work, due to a more tightly regulated labor process. Hochschild 
92 For an explanation of deep and surface acting see (Goffman, 1973; Hochschild. 1983). 
172 
(1983) argues that the speed up of flight attendant work cause workers to engage in more 
surface acting, using their smiles, rather than deeper, more genuine forms of emotional 
display. Similarly call center work requires similar surface acting, since the work is 
characterized by high call volumes, brief and scripted interaction with customers (Taylor 
& Bain, 2005). Outbound call center workers may be told to "smile-and-dial" and 
"customers can 'hear' your smile on the other end of the line." " Workers are told to act 
upbeat and cheerful, regardless of their own true feelings. However, in cross cultural call 
center work, workers must not only manage their emotional displays, but also their 
cultural expressions. 
Yet, high value, offshore services, such as IT and knowledge intensive 
professional services, also require cultural skills. Higher value cross-cultural service work 
presents an interesting contrast, since it is characterized by higher levels of autonomy and 
interpretation, which is more difficult to script, relative to call center work. In this context 
skill requirements emphasize deeper acting, communicating in a Western style that 
facilitates long-term collaborative work and approximates a client's own approach to 
work. Offshore professional services require interpretive skills that are more difficult to 
standardize; target business clients, rather than general consumers; and involve 
interaction that is longer in duration, iterative, and with the same group of individuals. 
The nature of this interaction means that it is not feasible for offshore knowledge 
intensive service workers to pretend that they are domestic workers, as call center 
workers do. The requirement of cultural skills persists even in highly technical services 
characterized by comparatively low levels of interaction, such as international 
931 heard these phrases repeated by managers in sales and call center environments in multiple US 
companies between 2000-03. 
173 
teleradiology. Training in knowledge intensive professional services emphasizes the 
clarity of written and verbal communication with clients and embodying the attitudes 
possessed by business clients in the West. 
ii. A Colonial Legacy 
The ability of a firm exporting services to be successful and move into higher-
level services depends upon firm employees' ability to perform American or European 
cultural repertories. This is due in part to the fact that the majority of offshore services 
exported from India go to US based clients (61 percent) with the United Kingdom ranked 
as the second largest market (NASSCOM, 2010). However, its not just that western client 
are the customers, but that the style and manner those services are provided to customer 
is itself shaped by behaviors, modes of speaking and interacting that are culturally 
dependent. Therefore, the cultural skills taught in offshore call centers in India are 
reminiscent of and build upon repertoires learned during the British colonial period 
(Mirchandani & Maitra, 2007). These skills include familiarity with the English 
language, Western dress, some Western business practices and cultural norms, and 
Western socio-political institutions, such as the legal system and educational system. The 
skills and behaviors valued in both the colonial and the contemporary periods are those 
possessed by the dominant trading partner. 
Despite the imperial, one-sided nature of skill learning and adoption in India, the 
contemporary offshore outsourcing service industry in India differs from the effect 
colonialism had on earlier Indian development. Under British colonialism India's share of 
global income declined from 22.6 percent in 1700 to 3.8 percent in 1952 (Maddison, 
2007) and skill levels and industrial capabilities in leading industries, such as textiles, 
174 
also declined. Today, the offshore service industry is growing and characterized by a 
definitive deepening of skills and capabilities moving from exports in back office and call 
center services into a variety of knowledge intensive professional services. 
While India's British colonial legacy has provided India with some skills that help 
its modern workforce perform intercultural work, differences in cultural repertoires 
between India and the West remain. There is also considerable internal variation in 
cultural repertoires amongst both "Indians" and "Westerners." Within India, for example, 
cultural practices differ significantly between the north and south, urban and rural, and 
even between and within individual Indian states, which tend to be organized along 
specific linguistic and cultural lines.95 Despite the diversity of the Indian citizenry, Indian 
knowledge professionals are a much more homogenous group because they 
predominately live and work in urban areas, are educated in higher quality urban 
schools with stronger English language instruction,97 and generally hail from middle to 
high caste positions (Upadhya & Vasavi, 2006). These employee attributes ensure the 
industry retains high levels of cultural capital required by the offshore outsourcing 
industry. 
Hi. A Theory of Cultural Labor 
I use the term cultural labor to refer to the management of individuals' cultural 
repertoires that are deployed to create the sensation for the client or customer that they 
are interacting with somebody from their same culture. Jobs requiring cultural labor have 
94 Prior to colonization, India was one of most advanced textile producers in the world. Much of this 
artesian skill was lost when Britain flooded the Indian market with cheap, mass produced textiles. See 
(Patnaik, 1999). 
95 Southern Indian states in particular were formed according to the dominant regional linguistic 
communities residing in the area. 
96 92.7 percent of IT and ITES industry exports come from just 7 cities in India (NASSCOM, 2009a). 
97 Personal interview, Director, NASSCOM, April 7, 2009. 
175 
three basic characteristics. First, they require interaction with customers. This interaction 
may occur face-to-face, voice-to-voice, or virtually through emails and other 
collaborative technologies. Second, they require that workers make customers feel "at 
home" by utilizing skills and repertoires that minimize or erase cultural difference and 
the misunderstandings that may result from those differences. Third, they allow the 
employer, through training, to regulate and shape the outward cultural expressions of 
employees. 
Cultural laborers are produced through the teaching of specific cultural repertories 
using a combination of various methods operating at different levels of analysis. At the 
macro and meso-levels, cultural repertoires may be diffused through a history of colonial 
domination, through popular consumption of Western or Western inspired media (i.e. 
cultural imperialism via the culture industries), and through educational institutions that 
teach Western modes of interaction, often through instruction in English. These 
mechanisms diffuse these repertories unevenly along class and urban-rural divisions. 
At the micro level intercultural repertoires are built through iterative intercultural 
interaction. However, learning the skills required to perform cultural labor through "trial-
and-error" on-the-job training in the workplace is too slow and risky for many firms 
specializing in global services. Making costly mistakes that are the result of cultural 
misunderstandings can cost firms their clients and reduce future opportunities to move 
into higher value services. As a result, many firms first pre-select job candidates that have 
comparatively high levels of cultural capital, intercultural and interpersonal skills, which 
are developed through a combination of the mechanisms outlined above. Firms then 
supplement those skills with new hire induction training and follow-up "refresher" 
176 
trainings. These firm training practices build upon the macro and meso-level mechanisms 
and produce cultural laborers capable of performing offshore work. Below I identify the 
different ways cultural labor is deployed in lower-level call center work and in higher-
skilled knowledge intensive professional services. 
IV. Cultural Labor and Upgrading 
i. The Effects of Cultural Skills 
The need for cultural skills is common in a wide variety of offshore service work 
ranging from call center, information technology services, and knowledge intensive 
professional services, despite significant differences in the technical skills required. The 
skills required to perform cultural labor achieve three goals: 1) they send signals of 
quality; 2) they increase effective communication required for collaborative work; and 3) 
they conform to clients preferred work style. Using the data collected for this study, I 
draw upon the discourse Indian executives, managers, workers, soft skill trainers, and 
Western managers use in discussing the challenges resulting from cultural differences 
between offshore Indian workers and their Western clients as well as their discussion of 
the solutions to these challenges. Analytically I separate the three goals cultural labor 
achieves, although in practice these goals may be reached simultaneously. 
First, cultural skills affect the perceived quality of services. The need for signals 
of quality is particularly important for the trade of services due to the variable nature of 
services and their dependence on interaction to be produced. According to a training 
consultant, employees that have insufficient cultural sensitivity and understanding cause 
clients to lose confidence in what the employee is capable of technically and this 
sentiment is reflected in the interaction with the client and in customer satisfaction 
177 
surveys (interview, 5/24/10). Some managers went so far as to remark that cultural and 
soft skills are as important as technical skills in providing knowledge intensive 
professional services (GRC, 6/3/10). This is because an employee's work may be 
technically correct, but if the employee is unable to communicate this to the client then 
the perception of the work, the relationship, and client confidence in the firm's capability 
for future work is harmed. This demonstrates the interdependency between technical 
"hard" skills and "soft," interactive, social and cultural skills. In cross-cultural work, 
cultural skills shape the perception of technical skills, therefore demonstrating the 
centrality these skills have in industrial upgrading, even for relatively services that have 
relatively low levels of interaction with clients, such as 3D Lab work. 
Second, cultural skills increase effective cross-cultural communication. The 
failure of a worker to respond or communicate in the manner that the client is familiar 
with results in miscommunication of varying degrees (training consultant, 5/24/10). A 
recurring cultural challenge identified by respondents is that Indian workers tend to be 
indirect communicators, while Western clients tend to be direct communicators. This 
shares similarities to what Nadeem refers to as India's "culture of deference" (Nadeem, 
2011). According to respondents, Indians live in a society that is more culturally sensitive 
to status hierarchy; it is generally considered overly direct and rude to tell a superior "no" 
in reference to a specific request. When Indian employees are asked a difficult question, 
they may be evasive and verbally agree with their client in order to avert conflict with a 
perceived superior. These differences in communication styles between North American 
clients and Indian workers are difficult to bridge. A training consultant, originally from 
178 
Scotland, described her biggest challenge as trying to teach Indian workers to 
communicate more directly: 
They weren't used to it. . . . [a call could be] going on 20 minutes longer than it 
should have gone because the engineer should have said, 'No, that's just not 
possible. We'll just do it another way' . . . But he won't say [that]. So it was 
trying to get them just to realize that it's okay just to say, T don't know' . . . . they 
find it really difficult to just be direct, I think, and that led to lots of confusion, 
lots of frustration on the customer side (training consultant, Microsoft, 5/17/10). 
In the quote above, the trainer is trying to teach the Indian employee to say "no" or "I 
don't know," but found it extremely difficult to get the worker to adopt that more overt 
communication style. The disconnect between the two communication styles causes 
lower customer satisfaction and lower confidence in the Indian workers abilities. Indian 
workers' may also be frustrated that Western clients' fail to pick up that something 
cannot be done. 
Another example where differing communication styles can lead to serious 
problems in cross cultural business relationship is setting and adhering to deadlines and 
other expectations around work. For example, when a client asks if a specific service can 
be implemented by a specific date and hears "yes," from an Indian offshore worker the 
Western client will expect that the service will be implemented by that date. This is 
because in the United States people tend to take explicitly articulated statements at face 
value. If that implementation date is not met, however, the client will be upset, believing 
that the vendor did not meet work expectations and may have deceived him or her. 
However, the Indian worker who was asked to follow through on a difficult request may 
be unaware that the client views the verbal commitment as binding. This is because the 
subtext of what the Indian worker communicates, which the Western client may fail to 
pick up on, is "we will try." Consistent with these observations, another North American 
179 
manager commenting upon his Indian offshore workers wrote that, "People say 'yes' to 
requests; however it requires constant follow-up for them to deliver" (Manager of North 
American multinational, personal email correspondence, 11/8/09). Failure to meet client 
deadlines and other explicit work expectations may be terms for ending a relationship or 
at the very least cautiousness in allowing the offshore team to manage more critical 
business tasks. This, in turn, may have a detrimental effect on the future offshoring 
relationship, especially as it relates to moving into higher value tasks. 
Third, cultural skills allow workers to emulate Western behavioral styles that 
embody an individualized approach to work. Offshore service workers are expected to 
show "initiative," be "assertive," take "ownership of work," demonstrate "leadership," 
and "drive customer value." Indian training consultants, firm managers, employees, and 
western business managers reported that Indian workers often lack these skills. A 
challenge with some of these ideas, such as taking "ownership of work," demonstrating 
"leadership," and "driving customer value," is their abstract nature. These ideas are 
connected to a particular western business context that is difficult to translate outside that 
context. Workers may not intuitively know what these ideas mean and may not know 
how to model them without tangible examples or practice. Westerners, such as managers 
and firm employee trainers, also face challenges in trying to explain these behaviors. 
According to an Evalueserve manager providing business research services, employees 
need guidance and training to embody the approach required by clients: 
You have to really guide them [employees] extensively and [a] lot of times, even 
how to interact with clients, how they should structure their e-mails, what kind of 
questions they are free to ask, and how they should think, rather than 'taking' 
work, they should 'own' work . . . you don't get [these skills] in less than one year 
[emphasis added] (personal interview, Manager, Evalueserve, 2/13/08). 
180 
This quote shows the manager's perception that his employees need help learning to act 
assertively, by learning the appropriate questions to ask a client. The manager also 
emphasizes the importance of ownership, when he says employees should not passively 
accept work, but "own work," by actively take responsibility for work output. The quote 
demonstrates the individualized approaches that Indian firms need to possess in order to 
gain the acceptance and confidence of their clients. Finally, this quote also illuminates the 
significant time and experience employees require in order to develop and internalize 
these skills. The fact that workers need a year or more of experience to develop these 
more interpretive and assertive modes of acting, underscores the deeper level at which 
these behaviors operate at, relative to more superficial Western cultural scripts that call 
centers employees may employee. 
A senior manager of a North American multinational company responsible for 
offshoring services to India wrote about the performance problems that may result from 
cultural differences and the inability to internalize western business norms toward work: 
The test team is the weakest part of the organization in terms of efficiency and 
effectiveness. [The group is characterized by a| very strong focus on metrics 
(execution rate, pass rate, etc.) with no real understanding of the impact or what 
really needs to be done to report on quality and customer value . . . The biggest 
obstacle is [a] change in culture . . . The rituals are followed religiously, but 
some of the spirit is lost (Personal email correspondence, emphasis added, 
11/10/09). 
In the above quote the manager sees the team as utilizing explicit metrics measuring 
productivity, yet fail to deliver customer value, which is not captured by these metrics. 
When later asked to clarify what this manager meant, he said he thought that the team 
was "simply going through the motions," rather than following through by delivering true 
value to the customer (North American Manager, 6/10/10). In this case, meeting metrics 
181 
and following rules did not translate into the desired labor output or quality, and in fact 
was indicative of the perceived lower technical competence of the team. The manager 
was frustrated by his perception that the Indian team produced work that was superficial 
and needed a high degree of guidance from management in order to meet work 
expectations relative to the three other teams he manages across North America. This 
experience suggests management required a deeper level of acting than the superficial 
performance that the worker provided. 
The manager's perceptions that his offshore Indian workers are unable to take 
"ownership" and deliver customer value led to his decision that the Indian team should 
manage a mature product line, rather than the new strategic one under development. This 
decision was in contrast to his initial view when he took over management of the offshore 
team, at which point he considered broadening the Indian team's responsibilities from 
low-level maintenance work to include "ownership of a whole product" (Manager of 
North American multinational, personal interviews, 2/1/09; 6/10/10). Yet, the manager 
decided to put the Indian team in charge of a mature service line performing low-level 
maintenance work. Working on a mature service line requires lower skill levels and 
offers fewer opportunities to develop new skills that can be used on higher-level future 
projects. While the manager views this as a step up in responsibility, what is noteworthy 
is his scaling back on his initial plans of utilizing their technical skills on high-value 
strategic products based on his perception that the team lacked the ability to deliver "high 
value" work. 
Performing western behavioral styles, such as showing "initiative" and being 
"assertive," may overlap with the previous stated goal of advancing effective 
182 
communication required for collaborative work. One example is encouraging workers to 
proactively ask clarifying questions around the details of work. A manager at Infosys 
involved in starting up a large employee project emphasized the importance of 
developing interpersonal communication skills and an understanding of what norms are 
expected in the U.S. business culture in her employees: 
I want. . . [employees] extremely comfortable talking on the phone with the 
client, I want them to get attuned to an American accent because the minute they 
come on the floor, the day they join me, there is going to be trainers from the US 
here for the next eight weeks. They need to be able to understand them. They 
need to be able to be comfortable with them and ask the right questions. They 
need to be able to speak up, for example, which is a huge issue with lot of Indians 
(personal interview, Director, Infosys, 4/23/09). 
The quote above highlights the difficulty that India workers may have in understanding 
American clients, both in terms of their accents and cultural norms. As indicated above in 
the discussion of indirect communication, Indian workers face challenges adopting the 
communication style of their American counterparts. Here, the respondent notes the 
importance of learning to proactively ask questions when something is unclear. American 
businesspeople expect to hear clarifying questions if employees arc unclear about 
instructions, instead of looking for more tacit cues that employees may not understand the 
instructions provided. If Indian workers do not assimilate these Western norms of 
communication there is a danger of miscommunication, since Western workers are not 
taught or expected to learn Indian communication practices. 
ii. Cultural Skills Over the Course of the Relationship 
There are particular periods in offshore outsourcing relationships when firms and 
employees possess fewer soft skills and weaker cross-cultural skills; at such times, there 
is a higher propensity for cultural misunderstanding with clients. These periods are when 
an Indian firm first begins to offshore services, adopt new clients, expand into new 
183 
services, and when employees are newly hired or promoted into positions with increased 
responsibility for managing customers interaction. 
During the initial founding of an independent offshore service firm, cultural 
expertise of clients in the new organization is particularly low. Executives and managers 
at all 4 firms reported the highest level of difficulty in adopting new cultural repertoires 
during the founding period of company or division. However, cultural labor was 
particularly important for firms that are more dependent upon their clients for learning, 
such as the GRC and Infosys. The GRC reported that during the first 8 to 12 months the 
company encountered many "cultural problems," but after this phase they were no longer 
regularly occurring issues (personal interview, Manager, 6/3/10). This is because 
repeated interaction tends to reduce the level of cultural misunderstandings and improves 
the nature of the interaction. 
Another period when firms are vulnerable to cultural misunderstanding is during 
the initial stages of an offshoring relationship either during a short-term ad hoc project or 
during a transitioning of service from the client site to a full-time offshore dedicated 
team. Both varieties require the offshore firm to learn a number of new skills, while also 
gaining the client's trust in the their capabilities. A transition manager at Infosys reported 
that those employees working on transitioning services from one-country to another need 
industry specific knowledge as well as good people skills and soft skills (personal 
interview, 11/29/07). The full-time dedicated team format is characterized by more one-
on-one interaction between onshore and offshore workers, which speeds up the learning 
of cultural skills required to manage this interaction. Offshore firms, however, are much 
more likely to secure a full-time equivalent dedicated team contract only after first 
184 
providing services successfully in an ad-hoc short-term trial run. Client-vendor 
interaction in the ad-hoc set up is more tightly controlled by offshore management and 
team leaders and it occurs less frequently, with conference calls occurring only once 
every two weeks around key service milestones, rather than on a daily basis. 
Another critical period is when a new employee joins the team servicing offshore 
clients and when employees are promoted into positions in which they are responsible for 
managing client relationships. While firm training programs accelerate the cultural 
learning, the threat of new employees doing or saying something damaging to the 
relationship still exists. For this reason, companies routinely funnel interaction with the 
client through managers and team leaders who have more experience interacting with 
specific clients from specific cultures. This client management structure is particularly 
true in ad hoc or one-time projects (personal interview, Group Manager, Evalueserve, 
2/13/08). Some clients, especially those using dedicated offshore teams, which rely on 
full time offshore labor, often want to have one-on-one contact with offshore and onsite 
workers, rather than having all information filtered and delivered through managers. In 
both circumstance, however, there is additional training and observation that must occur 
after new hire induction training, but prior to full client interaction: 
We would love to have all our people interact with clients on fa] day-to-day basis. 
But we would generally train them for 6 to 8 months in the finer aspects of client 
communication. A) There is the way you communicate things. B) You try and 
improve your accent, right? How do you introduce yourself, so on and so forth? 
So there is a training period of 6-8 months where they join client calls, see how 
the processes [works] and then they start interacting (Group Manager, 
Evalueserve, 2/13/08). 
Learning the style of communicating is important. This manager also emphasizes that 
employees need to learn to speak in the "right" accent style -just as call center workers 
185 
are trained to do - before they are permitted to manage because they spend significant 
time managing client relationships. This demonstrates that even in high value services, 
such as financial research, require convincing performances of surface acting, such as the 
presentation skills on a call or on a client visit and speaking in an accent that sounds less 
"Indian." 
V. Producing Cultural Laborers: Training Processes 
Firms produce cultural laborers through intensive soft skill and cultural training. 
These training programs are part of a broader trend in India to invest heavily in upgrading 
workers skills. These relatively high investments in training in India are due to two 
factors. First, there is growing consensus that there is a shortage of employable skilled 
workers in the IT and ITES industry and cross-cultural skills were a key skill deficiency 
identified by studies and by interview respondents (NASSCOM & McKinsey, 2005). 
Second, a tightening labor market in services has caused firms to increasingly recruit 
employees who have lower levels of English linguistic and cross-cultural skills than 
earlier recruits. This is true across the Indian service export market, but is most 
pronounced at the lower end of the skill spectrum, which has experienced the highest 
increase in the recruitment of employees hailing from rural areas that have lower quality 
English education, less exposure to Western culture, English language media and 
speakers, when compared to more cosmopolitan urban centers. As a result of the 
changing demographic of workers in this sector and feedback from customer satisfaction 
surveys, outsourcing firms have increased investments in cultural sensitivity and soft skill 
training more generally. Soft skill and cultural sensitivity trainings are a widespread 
186 
industry practice that not only target lower skill employees, but also highly educated 
urban employees with high levels of cultural capital. 
Firm training is focused on producing laborers that fit the cultural expectations for 
a global workforce. Many of the goals and skills training sessions purport to teach in 
knowledge intensive professional services and call center work are similar, however, in 
practice there are differences in the cultural skills emphasized, learned, and developed. 
For example, one training course targeting call center employees sought to teach 
"etiquette, willingness to take responsibility, grooming, consistency, time management, 
attentiveness, emotional quotient [measure of emotional management], ownership, team 
spirit, initiative" (See Table 6.1: Goals and Skills from Business Process Training 
Course). In practice, however, the two-week training schedule did not focus on 
developing many of these skills, such as "ownership" and "team spirit." Instead, with the 
content of the training focused on material and exercises that emphasized the practice of 
those skills that will most easily help Indian agents "pass" for employees from the West. 
The majority of the actual time in training is spent learning grammar and language 
mechanics (i.e. subject verb agreement), pronunciation, eliminating "Indianisms" from 
English speech (i.e. substitute the Indian phrase "out-of-station" for "out-of-town"), 
teaching forms of American and British humor (sarcasm, etc), geography, sports, and 
other "local" small talk. These relatively short training sessions focus on providing 
workers the skills and practice to provide more convincing surface acting performances 
of cultural labor. 
Knowledge process outsourcing training sessions may touch upon these linguistic 
skills, but the major emphasis is on learning western cultural repertoires that reduce 
187 
miscommunication and embodying western behaviors, such as leadership and 
presentation skills. That is to say, in knowledge intensive services, workers are expected 
to develop the cultural skills to provide deeper, more embodied forms of acting. 
Knowledge workers are expected to use higher-level thinking skills, interpretation, and 
analysis, and are expected to act with more autonomy. For example, Evalueserve 
encouraged employees to present power point presentations that were video taped, in 
order to practice providing presentations for clients and evaluate their performance. 
Managers and workers reported valuing these trainings, which suggests that 
workers may not feel the forms of alienation and disenchantment associated with 
performing emotional labor in lower value interactive services work. A manager from 
an offshore teleradiology center emphasized the importance of learning these cultural and 
interactional skills because, 
Technical aspects, to my mind, are easier to practice and pick up. The soft skills, 
where you have limited [opportunities to practice] interactions, and you have to 
get those interactions right with the customer, plays a very important role in terms 
of the relationship, in terms of enhancing business (Manager, GRC, 6/3/10). 
The passage above shows the limited opportunity workers have to master these soft skills 
within the everyday work routine, but also how important it is to have those skills in 
order to build the business relationship. 
Indian firm managers, employees, and firm trainers from this study reported that 
cultural sensitivity trainings helped improve interaction and reduced cultural 
misunderstandings that could have a negative impact on cross-cultural business 
relationships. Firm managers reported that their firm's customer satisfaction surveys 
98 See (Hochschild, 1983; Leidner, 1993). My ethnographic observations and interviews did not uncover 
the "games" workers sometimes use to resist management control (Burawoy, 1996; Sherman, 2006). The 
absence of these games may be due to the relatively high levels of autonomy and class position occupied by 
higher value service workers relative to low value service workers who often engage in these games. 
188 
reflected the efficacy of their firm's training programs. If these training programs in fact 
help improve cross-cultural interaction as respondents claim, it is curious that only Indian 
employees undergo this training. Training of both "onshore" Western clients and Indian 
"offshore" labor would further increase the effectiveness of communication and 
collaborative work, yet cultural sensitivity training of western workers rarely occurs. The 
one sided nature of this training reflects power difference between client and vendor; 
developed nations and developing nations. The effect of this one-sided cultural training 
results in cultural assimilation of the Indians into Western cultural modes of behavior. 
VI. Labor Process Control and Constraints on Cultural Labor 
The cultural repertoires taught through intensive soft skill and cultural training 
produce cultural laborers, yet the ability of workers to deploy these repertoires is partly 
constrained by an emphasis on pleasing customers and increasing management control 
over the labor process. Workers are taught to produce "customer delight," and treat the 
customer as "king" during employee induction trainings and within the context of on-the-
job training. These messages are at odds with the cultural values workers are expected to 
embody with customers, such as initiative, assertiveness, and saying "no" to difficult to 
achieve requests from clients. 
The offshore model, particularly in knowledge intensive services, is dependent 
upon securing repeat business with existing customers. In financial services, both Infosys 
and Evalueserve reported that at least 75 percent of their business was derived from 
repeat business from existing customers. In teleradiology this figure is closer to 100 
percent, since the significant entry barriers and time investment required to document that 
189 
medical, legal, and privacy standards and regulations (i.e. medical credentials, 
malpractice insurance, appropriate state medical licenses, compliance with privacy 
regulations) are met and on record makes short term business relationships impractical. 
Firm dependence on repeat business with existing customers makes customer satisfaction 
a very high priority. One of the gauges firms use to determine a client's willingness to 
continue to do repeat business is through customer satisfaction surveys. As a result, all 
firms from this study reported detailed processes of monitoring customer feedback to 
ensure clients' are happy with their services. At a financial service firm, customer 
satisfaction surveys that are returned with a rating lower than a 4 out of 5 requires the 
operations team responsible for the project to provide a formal explanation of what went 
wrong: 
The feedback form, once it is filled [out] by the client, it goes to every one in the 
top management. We generally get ratings of about 4/5 so we are not happy with 
anything, which dips [below] . . . . 3 is 'meets expectations,' 4 is 'exceeds', and 5 
is 'delighted.' Anything at 3; then the top management gets involved because 
feedback on each project goes to the top management and then we basically 
discuss what went wrong and then we call the client to understand why (group 
manager, Evalueserve, 2/13/10). 
Another Senior Manager discussed the process for handling ratings that were satisfactory 
or below by upper management: 
If we get ratings of satisfactory or below, then it goes to the entire top 
management, including [individual names omitted], and then there is lots of 
internal fire as to why?, what happened?, what went wrong?, so that we got a 
rating lower than meeting expectation rating (Assistant VP, Evalueserve, 
2/13/08). 
The high visibility of these customer satisfaction surveys to executive management 
means that there is a considerable top down pressure on middle managers and workers to 
ensure that these customer survey reports come back with high ratings. I argue that this 
190 
pressure puts limits on the resistance a worker can make on customer demands around 
work requests and delivery timelines. 
In high value offshore professional services, the level of management oversight is 
higher than traditional professional work, which further constrains workers expressions 
and behaviors. Professions are generally characterized by expertise, power, and authority 
(Abbott, 1988) and professionals are expected to use high-level thinking skills, 
interpretative skill and possess a degree of autonomy. Offshore professional work is not 
scripted like call center work, yet professionals operating in an offshore work 
environment have lower levels of power and authority relative to traditional professionals 
due to the way the labor process has been constructed. These changes in the labor process 
are driven by perceptions that services from lower cost labor markets are characterized by 
lower quality and a lack of familiarity with training and educational norms. 
The delivery of teleradiology services is an area characterized by high levels of 
management oversight. According to the supervising Indian certified radiologist at a 
teleradiology services company, professionals working overseas are subject to more 
oversight, both by the Indian service provider and the client: 
A new radiologist joining there [at the client site] would say this is how I see it 
and seeks no approval. Unfortunately, since we are doing it from a distance, the 
kind of checks, which are put in are more stringent and so we have to comply to 
an individual who is a standard and then we move on from there (supervising 
radiologist, GRC, 4/16/08). 
The quote above shows that the client defines the acceptable standard, embodied in the 
judgment of a designated person, who offshore workers must conform to. Comparing the 
work processes at the client site to the work process in the offshore arrangement provides 
evidence of increased management oversight, which in turn constrains the expression of 
191 
cultural labor taught articulated in firm training. Turning a two-dimensional radiological 
image into a three-dimensional image helps radiologists see and diagnose abnormalities 
affecting patient health. This work process used to produce these images at a large US 
based hospital has two basic steps (see Table 6.2). First, a U.S. technologist manipulate 
the two dimensional CT scan or MRI they receive with computer software. Second, the 
technologist electronically sends the enhanced image to an American Board Radiologist 
in the hospital for interpretation. To produce the same finished product for the same US 
hospital, however, the offshore team at the GRC must conduct two to three additional 
steps (see Table 6.3). After the Indian technologist produces the three-dimensional image 
an Indian certified radiologist and the supervising Indian radiologist review the image. 
The client's team of technologists audits 1 out of 10 image from the offshore facility 
before it is sent to the American Board Radiologist for an interpretation. The additional 
oversight of offshore work erode the professional autonomy and control over work and 
further suggest the difficulty in taking complete "ownership" of work. 
VII. Conclusion 
Success in offshore service work is dependent on firms and their workers to 
perform cultural labor. Performing cultural labor requires interactional skills, which are 
culturally specific to a western business context. In practice, the performance of cultural 
labor is one-sided, mirroring the unequal power relations that this trade takes place 
within. Firms that successfully hire and train employees with Western cultural skills are 
at an advantage in retaining satisfied customers and gaining their confidence to do higher 
value work. The skills required to perform cultural labor help send signals of quality, 
192 
increase effective communication required for collaborative work, and conform to clients 
preferred work style. The ability for cross-cultural teams to communicate together 
without misunderstanding each other is central for the delivery of knowledge intensive 
services because it is through these client-vendor interactions that clients clarify and 
modify work requirements and provide feedback on service quality. 
Firm level training produce cultural laborers that in turn help Indian firms deliver 
services in the style that their customers require. Training in knowledge intensive 
professional services emphasizes the clarity of written and verbal communication with 
clients and embodying the attitudes held by Westerners. This differs from the training 
used to produce cultural laborers in offshore call center, which is designed to mask 
employees' true identity and calling location through the training of Western language 
pronunciation and manner of speaking. 
The adoption and expression of western cultural behaviors are hampered to a 
degree through firm emphasis on creating "customer delight" and increased control over 
the labor process relative to traditional "onshore" professional services. Further control of 
cultural labor occurs through the structuring of client-vendor cross-cultural interaction 
through management with more developed cultural repertoires. Restructuring the offshore 
labor delivery with more oversight, both by the Indian firm and on the client site, further 
constrains the opportunities to embody certain western behaviors such as ownership, 
assertiveness, and worker autonomy. In the future, the articulation of the required cultural 
skills within the offshore service market will likely change as the geographic distribution 
of offshore service continues to shift to other markets. 
193 
Table 6.1: Goals and Skills from Business Process Training Course 
BPO finishing 
school Course 
Outline 
10 Corporate 
Skills 
• Effective Business Writing in 
English 
• Expanding Active Business 
Vocabulary 
• MS Outlook & Typing 
• Business English Idioms & 
Expressions 
• Etiquette 
• Grooming 
• Consistency 
• Time Management 
• Emotional Quotient [measure of 
emotional management] 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Cross Cultural Communication 
Techniques 
Global Business Etiquette 
Telephone Etiquette & Active 
Listening 
Email Etiquette 
Ownership 
Attentivcness 
Team Spirit 
Initiative 
Willingness to take responsibility 
Table 6.2: GRC US based client's internal process for performing 3D scans 
Initial read final sign off authority 
U.S Technologist -> American Board Radiologist 
Table 6.3: Offshore service delivery work process for same US based client 
Technologist -> 
Indian certified Doctor -> 
Supervising Indian Radiologist -> 
Audit check from client technologists -> 
Final sign off by American Radiologist 
Table 6.4: Cultural Labor Continuum of Surface and Deep Acting 
Depth of Acting 
Surface 
More consistent with 
Swidler's "toolkit" 
model 
More consistent with 
Bourdieu's habitus 
Deep 
Continuum of Cultural Behaviors in Offshore Service Work 
• Ability to engage in regionally specific "small talk" (weather, 
sports, etc) 
• Email and phone etiquette 
• Accent neutralization 
• Adopting more assertive behavioral style 
• Adhering to goals associated with western business culture 
(creating value, etc) 
• Overcoming "culture of deference" - ability to say "no" to 
superiors 
• Internalization of western business logic, mode of thinking 
194 
Chapter 7 
Conclusion 
This analysis in this dissertation identified four causal mechanisms for industrial 
upgrading in India's ITES industry. These are 1) the role of trade associations 2) firm 
level knowledge transfer through migration and client interaction 3) firm level training 
programs and 4) firm level creation of cultural knowledge. In India, trade associations 
and firms emerged as the central developmental actors driving industry development in 
IT enabled services, with the state playing an increasingly supporting role. Upgrading 
occurred through a number of association and firm level mechanisms that built skills and 
bolstered perceptions of the industry over time. Trade associations in particular played a 
key role in industry development by taking up four evolving roles in their interactions 
with the state, firms, and other entities, both inside and outside India. First, trade 
associations engaged in lobbying and made direct interventions in policy making. In 
filling these two roles, trade associations fostered the creation of developmental policies 
that removed constraints on growth (i.e. infrastructure and labor limitations) and 
increased profitability. Second, trade associations engaged in industry promotion and 
image management. In filling these latter two roles, trade associations shaped perceptions 
of industry capabilities both within India and abroad. In addition to the efforts of trade 
associations, firms helped build both technical and cultural skills through client 
relationships, migration of technical professionals, and firm level training programs. 
195 
The analysis of the trade association and firm roles described above suggests that 
upgrading is not only about the deepening of industry skills, but also signaling credibility 
in higher-level skills. Credibility is important in any industry, but it takes on a particular 
significance in the service industry, because services are more difficult to define relative 
to manufactured commodities. It is precisely because service quality is difficult to assess 
that credibility in service delivery becomes an important indicator of service capability. 
Further still, credibility takes on even greater importance in the context of offshore 
outsourcing work, wherein developing countries must prove their capacities to deliver 
high-level knowledge services to markets in developed countries. 
/. Institutions and Mechanisms for Upgrading 
State investments in higher education and the creation of early industrial policies 
were necessary, but an insufficient condition for the establishment of the ITES industry 
and subsequent upgrading. In Chapter 2 I described the significant leadership and 
investments that the state provided in higher education, which were instrumental in 
creating a foundational technical base for later industry development. The state also 
crafted early industry policy framework that enabled development, even if these policies 
required significant improvements to meet evolving industry needs. While the state was 
the key actor through the 1970s, things began to shift as the state began to open up during 
the 1980s to cooperate with industry. 
Industry associations, emerged as key actors working alongside government to 
help the facilitate upgrading over time. State efforts alone around higher education were 
insufficient to meet the growing industry needs, particularly as industry growth 
accelerated during the 1990s. The formation of NASSCOM in 1988 and its growing 
196 
capability over time, which I described in Chapter 3, was crucial in helping to fine-tune 
industrial policy and remove constraints on growth. Trade associations were also 
important channels of information to the state, performing this function through lobbying 
efforts and interaction with government across functional areas of the state. During the 
late 1990s and early 2000s, trade associations began disseminating firm level practices in 
technical and cultural sensitivity training to other firms, sharing industry research with 
member companies and hosting conferences and panels on technical and interactive 
industry skills and practices. Trade associations were also "pulling up" firm level 
practices to the state level, providing industry level recommendations on approaches to 
training and higher education reform. The state, at both the local and federal levels, 
approached trade associations for recommendations to guide further industrial 
development. The state went on to ask NASSCOM to write policy recommendations that 
were later implemented at the local and federal level. 
Government and industry coordination within the IT and ITES industry, 
facilitated by NASSCOM, is part of a broader shift away from centralized government 
that exclusively financed, managed, and led development toward a more decentralized 
form of industry development that requires the interaction of the state and non-state 
actors. This shift in state roles is reflected in new state strategies and practices, such as 
the increasing adoption of public-private partnerships. This increased coordination 
between state and civil society actors constitutes a break from the more insular and 
autonomous approach of the state prior to the 1980s (Chibber, 2004; Evans, 1995). The 
findings of this dissertation suggest, however, that state-society ties alone are not enough 
to carry out the increasing complexity of private-public partnerships. Leadership is also 
197 
required and this leadership has increasingly come from an active trade association that 
moved beyond a facilitator role of state-society relationships, to also design, draft 
industrial policies, and manage development projects on behalf of the state. Examples of 
partnerships where trade associations have provided significant leadership range from 
spurring industrial development in smaller Tier II and Tier III cities to drastically 
increasing the production and quality of highly technical workers through educational 
reform generally and the creation of 20 new HIT institutions of higher education 
specifically (2009, p. 10; NASSCOM, 2008). Development is occurring though a 
partnership between the state and industry, providing a sharp contrast to both top-down 
statist models and neoliberal theories of the role of the state. While NASSCOM fulfilled 
a key role in facilitating state and industry partnerships and in upgrading skills more 
generally, the association was also instrumental in projecting industry capabilities. 
NASSCOM's role in "public relations and impression management" was also a 
key enabler for upgrading. The organization performed this role through its interactions 
with several different audiences at key points during the industry's history. First, the 
trade association prompted the state, which was historically biased toward the 
manufacturing sectors, to provide similar support to the software industry. By capturing 
the state's attention, NASSCOM lobbied and helped secure tax breaks on exports and 
deregulation of the telecommunications industry, which enabled growth. These policy 
changes sent an important message to foreign firms about the opportunities and potential 
available to them in India's IT industry. NASSCOM also focused on impression 
management in its interactions with India's own public, using slogans with mass appeal 
to gain their attention and later garner support for infrastructure projects, such as those in 
198 
telecommunications and power, that directly affected the industry's ability to provide 
services to foreign customers. As the industry grew, NASSCOM increasingly focused on 
managing the impressions of publics and governments outside India. It focused on 
improving the international image of the capabilities of Indian labor and firms and the 
security of sensitive data processed by Indian ITES firms. 
/. Firm level mechanisms 
Shifting the unit of analysis from trade associations to firms, I find inter-
organizational knowledge transfer is a key source of firm level upgrading. In Chapter 4 I 
identify two principal mechanisms that facilitate knowledge transfer, professional 
migration and skill upgrading through client interaction. Upgrading through the migration 
of skilled technical professionals results in much faster and higher level of upgrading 
than upgrading through client interaction. This is because workers are often performing 
that work prior to migration and the migration brings their skills and "know-how" into 
the country. Previous educational credentials and work experience at well-known 
international firms and hospitals act as a signaling device about the quality and credibility 
of the founders and, by extension, their firms. Skill upgrading through client relationships 
deepens skills slowly over time. Within the context of client relationships, onsite visits to 
clients were important relationship building periods, with employees learning from these 
clients, but also building their own credibility with the firm through that interaction. 
Evalueserve, which primarily gained the knowledge needed for financial services 
prior to the organization's first client engagement, still engaged in such client visits. Here 
the function of visiting clients was clearly more than just knowledge transfer, since these 
visits usually occurred after service delivery to clients was already in process and much 
of what was required for service delivery was obtained through the migration of technical 
199 
professionals who were trained and educated abroad. Instead, the primary purpose of 
these visits was to enable Evalueserve and its employees to form closer relationships with 
clients, while demonstrating their capabilities as those relationships grew. Client visits 
and employee movement between developed and developing contexts also provided 
"cultural" learning opportunities, which are the focus of Chapter 6. 
Firms create knowledge and upgrade skills through investment in firm 
orchestrated employee-training programs, but these programs also send signals to 
prospective and existing clients that serve to build firm credibility as knowledge service 
providers (Chapter 5). Firms simultaneously build skills and communicate their 
capabilities through the building of "universities," distribution of "white papers" that 
provide analysis and innovative approaches to research, running "academic" training 
sessions including hosting symposiums with industry professionals. Another way that 
technical capabilities are communicated is through the term "knowledge process 
outsourcing" itself, which was a term coined by an Evalueserve executive to differentiate 
the firm's services from lower value and more commoditized back office and voice 
services, such as data entry and call centers. The various firm level efforts to build 
technical and industry knowledge increases firm capabilities, but this process is not just 
about obtaining and building knowledge, but also makes a claim that one possesses 
"knowledge." 
Cross-cultural service work requires technical as well as non-technical skills 
(Chapter 6). In particularly, IT enabled services require cultural labor, which I define as 
the management of individuals' cultural repertoires that are deployed to create the 
sensation for the client or customer that they are interacting with somebody from their 
200 
same culture. At its core, the performance of cultural labor is meant to manage client 
impressions and signal firm credibility in services. The manner in which services are 
provided to a client shape the overall perception of the value of that service. Cultural 
labor operates on a continuum ranging from surface to deep acting. Lower value work 
tends to use more surface acting, such as engaging in small talk specific to a client's 
location and the adoption of western accents and pseudonyms in call center work (i.e. 
Steve instead of Suresh) to disguise one's national identity as is common practice in 
offshore call center work. Higher value services tend to require deeper acting, where 
workers need to internalize "business cultures" that are rooted in the West by relying on 
explicit rather than tacit communication strategies and abandoning so called "cultures of 
deference," enabling workers to assertively resist unobtainable requests from superiors 
and clients. 
In India, cultural skills build upon a tradition of colonialism and colonial 
education, but may also be generated and augmented through other means. India-based 
firms incorporate cultural awareness and interactive soft skills training into broader 
training programs that also build technical skills and industry specific knowledge. 
Cultural knowledge and soft skills are screened for in hiring practices and then further 
developed through firm training programs and through interaction with clients. The firm 
level screening processes and programs were in turn aggregated by NASSCOM at the 
industry level. NASSCOM developed an industry wide skill assessment tests, called the 
NASSCOM Assessment of Competence, that is used to screen industry job candidates, 
testing cultural rooted "soft" skills, such as an ability to read, write, and listen effectively 
in English and demonstrate command of western business etiquette. NASSCOM also 
201 
communicated to government officials the lack of preparedness Indian graduates had in 
interactive cultural skills and the need to address these deficiencies in higher education 
curriculum reform. Curriculum changes have already been adopted in many private 
colleges and universities and the central government is in the process of implementing 
these changes into its program to improve technical higher education. Elements of firm 
level training programs that teach cultural sensitivity and soft skills have been 
incorporated into national educational policy in "The Technology, Education, Quality 
Improvement Programme," which is a local and central government program, being 
rolled out across India emphasizing improvements of "soft skills" alongside 
improvements in technical education (Department of Higher Education, 2008, p. 13). 
//. Challenging Development Paradigms 
Trade associations and firms emerged as the central developmental actors in the 
development and upgrading of India's IT enabled services industry. This approach to 
industry development contrasts with both the approach of the state in previous periods of 
development in India and the role of the state in successful developmental models based 
on other country cases. The developmental model theorized in this dissertation diverges 
from the central mechanism identified by Vivek Chibber (Chibber, 2004). According to 
his account the developmental model that regimes choose to adopt shapes the role of the 
state and its relationship to industry. Chibber argues that India's embrace of import 
substitution industrialization-(ISI) provided industry an incentive to resist state authority 
and protect domestic markets, which had an adverse effect on development and 
innovation in the country, while Korea's adoption of export led industrialization (ELI) 
202 
created incentives for industry to accept the state's lead and their authority to discipline 
capital. 
My analysis finds the development in the IT and ITES industries followed a very 
different pattern that diverges from the route identified by Chibber. From the emergence 
of the software and services industry, both the state and industry were focused on the 
export market. The Indian state incentivized exports of software in 1972 with concessions 
on import duties on IT hardware if the machines were used for export purposes. With a 
developmental focus on export markets rather than internal domestic markets, Indian 
capitalists may have had new incentives to work with the state, but the Indian state never 
gained the ability to discipline capital, as was the defining feature of South Korea's 
developmental model. Instead, firms and their trade association emerged as 
developmental leaders in their own right, gaining more authority over the state and the 
state's developmental projects. Rather than the state disciplining capital in accordance 
with the state's industrial developmental plan, as in Korea, the Indian state solicited 
industry for their recommendations for planning and gave industry the authority to design 
developmental plans on behalf of the state. This developmental authority was centralized 
in trade associations, which emerged as the central actor driving industry development. 
The emergence and dominance of trade associations in the industry development 
process simultaneously reaffirms the importance of "embeddedness," while also showing 
the limitations of an understanding of the emergent actors that can help produce 
embeddedness. The developmental state literature refers to associations as facilitators in 
state-society relations and tends to characterize associational roles primarily in terms of 
99 Financial incentives are a classic strategy, used by developmental states, to entice entrepreneurs and 
firms to invest in nascent markets. 
203 
the forum they provide for policy makers and industry leaders to interact and create state-
society linkages (Evans, 1995; Pingle, 1999; Saxenian, 2000). More recent studies have 
found that business associations can directly affect actions taken by the state (Schneider, 
2004; Sinha, 2005). While the developmental state literature recognizes that trade 
associations can be a source of state-society relations, they have not been found to be the 
source of leadership in development. Yet the analysis in this dissertation demonstrates the 
ways in which trade associations may move beyond their traditional lobbying role to 
become developmental actors in their own right. This institutional arrangement differs 
drastically from the developmental bureaucratic states of South Korea and Japan, where 
the state was the authoritative and leading force behind industrial development. 
The Indian approach to development also differs from the developmental network 
state (DNS). The DNS is more "hands on" than the DBS and involves public sector 
officials working closely with industry to identify and support new strategic industries 
(Block, 2008; O'Riain, 2004). However, in India, the "hands on" work of development is 
initiated and largely performed by industry, led by the trade associations, rather than the 
state. It is associations that identify new strategic opportunities for industry, based on 
their connections to member firms and their own research of the market, and then 
coordinate with the state to enlist their support for developmental projects benefiting 
industry. The role of the Indian state has generally been reactive to industry problems, 
rather than proactive. The state's slow response in addressing the growing technical skill 
shortage in higher education during the 1990s and 2000s and key role trade associations 
and firms played in coordinating policy to address this problem illustrates the difference 
from the DNS. 
204 
A key reason why industry, rather than the state, assumed a leadership role in 
industry development is based upon the qualities of services themselves. There are three 
major points of differentiation between services and manufacturing that have implications 
on the institutional arrangement that foster industry development and on the state's ability 
to provide leadership for industry development specifically. First, the intrinsic qualities of 
services themselves mean that industry, rather than the state, has access to knowledge for 
development. In high technology manufacturing the state's knowledge may be limited, 
since it too also does not have access to firm level processes (Amsden, 2001). In services 
the state has even less access to production knowledge. This is because services are 
interaction intensive and production and consumption are difficult to decouple. The 
technical and cultural expertise required for service delivery is also enmeshed within 
service relationships themselves. This is particularly true in services that are highly 
integrated into clients' work processes, such as those provided by the GRC and Infosys, 
which make knowledge relationally dependent and difficult to extract. The interactive 
nature of services mean that the firms engaged in these relationships are the best source 
of information about what is needed for service delivery and the state does not have 
access to this knowledge. 
In manufacturing, in contrast, knowledge required for development is less 
embedded in relationships. Technology transfer is a major source of industry learning in 
manufacturing and while technology is tacit and never completely codifiable, even when 
copying it (Amsden, 2001, p. 51), it is still much easier to learn production insight for 
manufacturing process independent of customer relationships than is the case in services. 
This is due in part because developing countries may also gain insight into production 
205 
requirements for high technology commodities through the process of "reverse 
engineering." The manufacturing success of Korea and Taiwan depended upon the ability 
to reverse engineer products designed in developed markets (Lall, 2003). Reverse 
engineering does not require interaction and is performed within the developing country 
itself. In services, however, it is difficult to reverse engineer an interactive process and 
learning is difficult outside of service relationships. 
Second, the relatively low capital intensiveness of services, relative to 
manufacturing, makes firms less reliant on state leadership. Manufacturing usually 
requires large investments in physical machinery, while services; particularly at the lower 
skill level, require few capital investments beyond phone and computer equipment.100 
Manufacturing is capital intensive, requiring more state help in mobilizing capital to spur 
development. For example, the creation of a semi-conductor manufacturing industry with 
its requisite "cleanrooms" is an extremely capital and technologically intensive process. 
Under these circumstances, initial state investment and coordination are key components 
of creating a fledgling industry as the semi-conductor industry in Taiwan demonstrates. 
The lower relative costs associated with services suggest that this industry has lower 
barriers of entry for competing firms and nations. It also means that the service industry 
is less dependent upon the state's ability to mobilize capital to help support 
entrepreneurship and reducing financial risk in new strategic industries. The lower capital 
intensiveness of services, relative to manufacturing, offers a qualification to the historic 
role developmental state's play in mobilizing capital. Charles Lindblom observed that 
100 The lower physical capital requirements of services, however, are partially offset by higher total labor 
costs due to the general labor intensity of services. At the higher end of services ''knowledge workers" may 
be particularly difficult to find and relatively expensive. Nonetheless, start-up costs in services remain 
generally lower than in manufacturing. 
206 
states have strong thumbs, but clumsy fingers (Lindblom, 1977). By this he meant that 
states have strong thumbs that mobilize capital and affect structural transformation, but 
clumsy fingers that often lack the dexterity to fine-tune industrial policies. The lower 
capital intensiveness of services, however, suggests that states may not need as strong of 
thumbs, at least in the short-term, although state investments in education over the long-
term remain crucial in upgrading in services. 
Third, manufacturing requires more state-level interaction to coordinate the 
inward flow of raw materials and the outward flow of exports, relative to services. 
Material inputs and exported finished product pass through state owned and operated sea 
and airports and are strictly controlled by custom agencies. For example, a manufacturing 
company in India that requires steel for production will need to coordinate with 
governmental officials on import and export regulations. Services that cross national 
boundaries through telecommunications technologies, in contrast, largely bypass state 
control. The state does helps create telecommunications infrastructure for service 
transmission and also monitors transmissions for security and safety, yet these oversights 
are much less restrictive than the infrastructure and custom constraints for the movement 
of physical products. The interactive nature of service work, its lower initial capital 
intensiveness, and the decreased scope of state involvement in coordinating the flow of 
inputs and outputs in services relative to manufacturing serve to marginalize the state in 
the industry development process. 
207 
///. Broader lessons for policy makers 
Finding from the dissertation point to key recommendations for policy makers in 
developing countries that seek to emulate India's service model. Policy makers should 
adopt an approach to industry development that focuses on skill development as well as 
credibility building efforts. Policy ought to develop incentives and policies that develop 
both technical and cultural skills oriented to a specific export market. Skill upgrading 
takes place most centrally through long-term investments in higher education. However, 
continued interaction with firms and their representative associations are crucial in order 
to evaluate the quality and quantity of graduates and their ability to meet changing 
industry needs. 
Policy makers should also entice foreign credentialed professionals to return to 
their "home" countries to establish business operations to help foster development in skill 
intensive professional industries. Encouraging returning professionals provides two 
benefits when compared to more traditional, step-wise approaches to industrial 
upgrading. First, industry operations can be more quickly established in high value 
services by attracting highly trained technical professionals when compared to a slower 
knowledge transfer process taking place through relationships with firms based in 
developed countries. Second, attracting highly skilled credentialed professionals permits 
a higher upgrading trajectory. Attracting foreign trained and educated professionals helps 
bring new skills into the country, but it also "brings in" relationship ties. Entrepreneurs 
who return "home" bring back with them their network ties with other professionals and 
to organizations. These ties are important resources that may lead to trade relationships, 
but the ties abroad also signal credibility in the capabilities of the firm itself. 
208 
In order to attract technical professionals additional incentives may be necessary 
to help overcome the difficulty professionals may have in establishing business 
operations. Professionals that have credentials from a foreign country are not typically 
recognized in their own country, which makes earning money in the domestic market 
illegal and the business venture potentially more risky in the short-term. The state can 
help ease this burden by relaxing credential requirements in their home market for "pre-
approved" credentials from select countries that pass minimum standards. This would 
enable recent returnees a potential source of income, through domestic consulting, that 
could help bridge the period from return migration to firm profitability. The state could 
also provide additional exemptions or deferments that reduce start-up related expenses, 
such as waived fees for establishing utilities, down payments, and move in expenses for 
leased space in designated industrial parks. 
IV. Looking Ahead: Emerging Upgrading Opportunities in India's ITES 
Service Sector 
The Indian knowledge intensive service sector is continuing to both broaden in 
scope and deepen in skill intensity. One area within high-skill professional services that 
this study sheds light upon is legal process outsourcing (LPO). Offshore legal services are 
the fastest growing sub-sector in knowledge process outsourcing (KPO) area. In the midst 
of the global economic crisis, which pushed down overall growth rates of knowledge 
intensive services, the LPO sector grew by 40 percent and revenue growth from 2010 to 
2015 is predicted to be 26 percent annually (Aggarwal, 2010b). There are over 5,200 
legal professionals providing offshore services in India and the Philippines, contributing 
an annual revenue of approximately USD 300 million, and this is expected to reach 
209 
18,000 professionals with an annual revenue of USD 960 million by the end of 2015 
(Aggarwal, 2010b). Both Evalueserve and Infosys have moved into the legal outsourcing 
market and provide support in litigation, contract analysis, and legal research. Infosys, in 
2009, secured a 300-person project for a well-known legal research company, which 
constitutes a particularly large project in KPO services, where more typical engagements, 
such as those at Evalueserve, are 5 to 10 people and a large project has no more than 25 
employees. 
Despite the current and predicted growth in the volume of offshore legal services, 
similar professional constraints that made it difficult for upgrading in teleradiology 
services also apply to legal services. Upgrading opportunities in professional 
teleradiology services are shaped by the access to professional credentials that are 
recognized in a firm's target export market (see Chapter 5). At the lower value end of 
teleradiology services, such as those conducted by the GRC, the scope of work was also 
reduced relative to the activities conducted by typical technologists. At the GRC, 
radiologists and technologists focused on 3D lab work and did not interact with patients 
or capture images with radiology equipment (such as a CT or MR I scanners) as typical 
technologists do. GRC employees only performed the back-end 3D processing of images. 
Thus far, LPO services appear to be similarly constrained in scope and ability to upgrade. 
Offshore legal service providers are prevented from providing high value advising 
activities to clients without a state license. According to the legal services team lead at 
Infosys, legal services are, "very specific, restricted to the 'play book'... Right now, we 
would not advise on any law because we are not entitled to practice law, say in the US, 
where our clients are" (Infosys, 4/23/09). Legal services in an offshore model are highly 
210 
specialized, high in volume, but low in scope, restricted to a predetermined set of 
activities. Attorneys with Indian law degrees are not allowed to provide legal advice. As a 
result, they can do the kind of work paralegals do, such as legal research, but they are 
legally prevented from performing the broader and higher value activities typically 
completed by US lawyers. Speaking with the Director of LPO services at Infosys 
(4/23/09): 
Respondent: We wouldn't go and mark up a contract based on what we think is 
good for them. We would tell them that this is what we believe is good for you 
[the client], but it is left to you [to decide]. 
Interviewer: That is because you don't know the intricacies of US law? 
Respondent: No, I would know, but since we are not allowed to practice law in 
the US unless we are a registered lawyer there, we cannot provide legal advisory 
services, so I would not do it. 
Based on the Director's response the problem is not the lack of expertise and knowledge 
by firms, but a lack of access to do higher value work. This underscores the significant 
professional barriers to upgrading that have less to do with skill acquisition than access to 
markets. A way around this constraint would be to follow Teleradiology Solutions' lead 
in hiring professionals who have US credentials. If offshore firms hire US lawyers with 
the legal credentials recognized in specific state, as Teleradiology Solutions does with its 
American board certified radiologists, then the company would in a fact be able to 
provide those higher value-advising services. However, neither Infosys nor Evalueserve 
appears to be pursuing this strategy. 
V. Industry focus on India's Domestic Market 
Until recently, India's IT and ITES domestic market has been relatively ignored 
by firms who tended to favor an export strategy, primarily focused on the US market. The 
211 
market focus is becoming more balanced in response to changes in the Indian domestic 
market and currency markets; IT and ITES firms became more domestically oriented due 
to the rising economic prosperity of Indian firms, increased domestic familiarity with 
technology and services and how these can improve organizational efficiencies, and the 
volatility in currency exchanges, particularly against the dollar, which causes the costs of 
offshore services and reported firm profits, which were often reported in US dollars, to 
also fluctuate (See Table 7.1: Dollar to Rupee Currency Exchange 2006-10).I01 
The increased focus on India's domestic market has implications for industrial 
upgrading. Some scholars have highlighted that the domestic market presents an 
opportunity that may lead to additional upgrading (D'Costa & Sridharan, 2004). A major 
benefit to developing services for the Indian domestic market is that it has fewer entry 
barriers, both in terms of building credibility and recognition of domestic credentials, and 
will likely provide new upgrading and innovation opportunities in the future. Reduced 
entry barriers can provide industry a higher level of control and added opportunities to 
expand service delivery in terms of both scope and potentially more specialized at the 
higher skill end. A domestic focus on service delivery may also create innovations in 
process delivery. This is because the Indian domestic market is a much different 
operating environment, with a different set of challenges, when compared to developed 
export markets. But the Indian domestic market will also require new approaches from 
101 Fluctuations in currency exchanges, particularly against the dollar, prompted the IT and ITES industries 
to concentrate on the domestic market as way to diversify risk away from the US market and as a way to 
increase revenue. On October 31, 2006, 45.25 Indian Rupees equaled 1 US Dollar; but one year later the 
rupee appreciated by 14.7% and 39.46 Indian Rupees equaled $1 US Dollar (Evalueserve, 2007). While a 
rising rupee made US imports cheaper, it also had the effect of making Indian exports more expensive, 
thereby eroding the labor cost advantage that India provides. IT and ITES service firms sought to mitigate 
the risk of these currency fluctuations by diversifying into other markets. They focused increasingly upon 
two other export markets: the European market, which had a strong Euro currency valuation at the time, 
and Asia, which was characterized by high overall growth rates. The industry also increasingly saw India's 
domestic market as place to focus their efforts. 
212 
those that work in developed markets. Those studying and working at the level of the 
mass market in developing countries have found that methods of product development, 
marketing, and pricing schemes that work well in western and developed markets may 
not work as well in a developing country context (Hart, 2005; Prahalad, 2005). This new 
operating environment may lead to new service innovations. 
The Indian based IT and ITES firms are strongly positioned to grow services in 
the Indian market, given their familiarity with the marketplace, relative to foreign 
competitors, and the learning they have acquired or built through knowledge transfer and 
firm knowledge creation and training. Nonetheless, additional efforts appear to also be 
necessary, especially to help devise products and services for the less sophisticated small 
to medium sized Indian business customers. To aid IT and ITES firms in their penetration 
of the Indian domestic market, each of the major business associations (CII, FICCI, 
ASSOCHAM) as well as the industry trade association (NASSCOM) developed 
programs between 2005 and 2006 targeting the domestic market for IT and ITES as a 
focus for future growth. 
Despite the difference between the domestic and export markets, synergies 
between the markets exist, and what is learned in the export market can be applied to the 
domestic market resulting in upgrading and expanded scope of service delivery. These 
synergies are already occurring within the knowledge process outsourcing service sector. 
Teleradiology Solutions is a clear example of how a firm focused on export markets can 
use their knowledge and skills to expand services domestically, providing access to more 
highly skilled and trained technical personnel. Teleradiology Solutions uses the medical 
expertise that they have acquired and built and the delivery platform they constructed to 
213 
also provide remote teleradiology services to rural areas that lack access to radiologists. 
Teleradiology Solutions is not the only company providing remote teleradiology services 
within India, but they likely have the deepest expertise due to their knowledge transfer 
from US institutions and their ability to hire specialists in radiological subfields. 
Teleradiology Solutions obtained world-class technical expertise from top ranked 
international universities, then offered additional training through its firm-level 
"academic" training programs, and made that expertise available through the equipment 
and delivery capacity that it built to service international customers. All of the necessary 
investments, both in technical training and infrastructure, were paid for from international 
teleradiology profits and continuing profits are used to subsidize reduced cost or free 
services to the domestic market. This practice provides India a clear and direct 
developmental benefit in attracting foreign trained technical labor to India and also shows 
how a firm focused on international markets can simultaneously address technical 
shortages in a developing countries domestic market. The actual radiologists providing 
services in India's domestic market are Indian radiologists, rather than US radiologists, 
but the Indian radiologists have also benefited from Teleradiology Solutions aggregated 
expertise, which has been disseminated across the firm through its knowledge sharing 
"academic" sessions. The company also helps rural clinics and hospitals set up the 
infrastructure to receive patient medical diagnostic images, such as X-rays, MRI scans, 
CT scans, and ultrasound scans, over the Internet. 
Telereadiology Solutions has also built a medical facility on the ground floor of 
the company's 5-story office building to treat general patients. The clinic uses a similar 
cost structure used in the firm's main-line international teleradiology business, where the 
214 
firm uses services targeted at a more affluent population to build a technical and physical 
expertise to offer subsidized or free services to populations that lack access to medical 
professionals. The hospital specializes in providing medical services to the sizable 
"expatriate" community and Indian IT executives and managers that work for nearby 
multinational and offshore service companies. The hospital uses its technical 
credibility, new infrastructure, and proximity to IT industrial parks and affluent gated 
communities to position itself as a preferred medical center for patients that have the 
means to pay high margins for medical services. These higher margins help offset free 
and reduced services to poor patients and children in the community. 
VI. Replication of the Indian model? 
India is the leader of offshore outsourcing and has upgraded beyond low-level 
back office and voice services, but the field is becoming increasingly competitive with a 
number of new entrants, concentrated in specific regions, that are seeking to follow 
India's offshore service delivery model. Below I assess the potential of these challengers 
to replicate the Indian model of service development, based on the factors identified in 
this dissertation, and the long-term opportunities for each challenger to upgrade beyond 
low value services. This assessment is based upon a combination of industry and 
scholarly sources and my own analysis of the factors identified in the dissertation. These 
factors are: 
1. Educational system capable of producing high level of technical skills 
2. Proactive trade associations able to lead state and industry policy 
The hospital is managed by the Co-founder of Teleradiology Solutions who was trained as a pediatric 
cardiologist at Yale. 
215 
3. Domestic environment able to attract return migration of foreign educated and 
experienced technical professionals 
4. High level of firm investments in training 
5. Development of cultural skills (language, deep cultural understanding) oriented 
toward to a sizable export market 
The Indian model of IT and ITES services demonstrate the benefits of a large, 
technically skilled work force. Based upon absolute numbers, the "BRIC economies" (i.e. 
Brazil, Russia, India, and China) have a clear advantage. Yet, based on the analysis in 
this dissertation, China appears to be the only BRIC country that has a strong opportunity 
to challenge India lead in services. Russian lacks the state-industry relations that industry 
growth requires and Brazil lacks the language skills required to export ITES to Latin 
American countries or English speaking markets. However, there are some smaller states 
that also seek to follow Indian's lead into services that have at least some of the factors 
identified in the Indian service model. The Philippines sizeable ITES sector, low labor 
costs, and relative English fluency position the country as a strong challenger to India in 
higher value services. Below I will briefly analyze the major challengers in Asia, Russia 
and Eastern Europe, Latin American, and Africa in terms of the factors that lead to 
India's success. 
/. Asia 
China is a late entrant to the offshore service market, but their strong 
manufacturing base, deep pool of technical talent, and a supportive state provide them 
with one of the best opportunities to replicate the Indian model of service development. 
China's technical talent is the result of consistent and growing state investments in 
building higher educational institutions capable of producing a massive amount of 
216 
technical labor. The educational system produces over three million graduates including 
600,000 engineers a year. Industry in China is also characterized by strong government 
support. While the Chinese state model of development differs from that of India, it does 
not preclude the state from fostering the ties with the emerging service industry required 
for growth and upgrading. In addition, recent work suggests that China's approach to 
development is less top down than many suggest (Appelbaum, et al., 2011), which 
suggests that the state has the ability to interact with industry and trade associations to get 
industrial policies fine-tuned. The country has also been successful in courting technical 
professionals trained and educated abroad to return to establish entrepreneurial ventures 
there (Saxenian, 2006). 
China does have some challenges in following India's lead in services with 
respect to cultural and soft skill oriented towards the US export market. China has 
roughly 10 million English language speakers (Gott, 2007), yet these language skills are 
generally insufficient to meet the expectations of US based customers. Students 
graduating from the top schools, however, tend to have proficient English language skills 
and continuing state investments in building English language capability mean that China 
English language capability will continue to improve. However, the country has already 
achieved success in providing technical and engineering services to Japan and Korea, 
which it has a closer cultural affinity with, and these markets could offer China 
significant future opportunities in upgrading potential. Korean is one of the non-
Chinese languages widely spoken in the northeast part of the country (U.S. 
Department of State, 2010). The shared script between Chinese and Japanese mean 
that Chinese learn Japanese more easily than other languages. China is relatively 
217 
underdeveloped in services, although complementary services, such as remote 
engineering services and manufacturing design services, can be linked to its robust 
manufacturing sector. Labor costs are comparable to India's, where it is still possible to 
find a BPO employee for US $5000 per year (Manimala, 2008; Vedala, 2007). 
The Philippines has created an educated labor force with good English skills. It is 
strong in lower value-ITES, especially voice services, which command 70 percent of the 
country's ITES revenue, with medical and legal transcription a sizeable second. The 
countries strength in services can be an advantage relative to other labor markets, when 
trying to move up into higher value services. The country's biggest shortcoming, 
however, is the lack of a strong technical skill base, which will take significant time and 
large investments to build relative to other Asian labor markets. The higher educational 
system produces 2.3 million students, 10 percent of which are from technical fields, from 
1600 institutions (Kennedy & Sharma, 2009). Salaries are slightly higher than India and 
China. An entry level call center employee costs roughly $5,457 a year, while a team lead 
earns an average of $9,153 (Kennedy & Sharma, 2009). 
ii. Eastern Europe & Russia 
The USSR's long history of investments in technical education provides Russia 
and other Eastern European countries a strong technical base in IT and R&D capabilities. 
While Russia has 1,100 higher educational institutions and over 160,000 technical 
workers in science, math, and engineering, and expertise in research and development 
(Kennedy & Sharma, 2009; Vedala. 2007), the country suffers from poor government 
support and a lack of constructive ties between government and industry. Brain drain and 
lack of conducive of environment for industry operations also makes enticing foreign 
trained and educated professionals back to Russia difficult. Russia's service orientation 
218 
has been weak, and oriented toward IT, rather than the BPO sector, which is 
undeveloped, although opportunities to move into high-value non-voice related processes 
exist given its technical expertise. The country lacks strong English skills or cultural 
orientation to other large export markets. 
The former USSR republics in Eastern Europe are much more favorable offshore 
service providers than Russia. The expansion of the EU to include potential offshore 
service challengers, such as the Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, Hungry in 2004, and 
then Bulgaria in 2007 has made these lower cost destinations attractive for three reasons. 
First, Eastern European destinations have more cultural similarity to clients based in the 
European markets, including a wide range of European language skills with capabilities 
to serve multiple western European countries. The shared culture and languages will 
likely reduce errors and mistakes that are the result of miscommunication and cultural 
misunderstanding. Second, the integration into the EU legal framework may translate into 
the ability to transition professional work between countries that are traditionally blocked 
through credentialing and laws. Third, travel between Western Europe and Eastern 
Europe requires only a short flight relative to those required to get to other offshore 
delivery locations, such as India. 
Despite relatively high technical skills and the attractiveness of close cultural 
proximity to European markets, Eastern European countries suffer from higher labor 
costs and in ability to scale. Labor costs in Eastern European countries are low relative to 
Europe, but they are nearly double the labor costs for comparable skilled labor in India 
and China, making these destinations relatively unattractive outside of Europe, although 
the recent European economic crisis has pushed down currency valuations, which makes 
219 
this labor cheaper. The Czech Republic produces 100,000 graduates. 22,000 of whom are 
engineers or IT graduates and the country has a strong and growing presence in both IT 
and BPO services, and has adequate infrastructure (Vedala, 2007). Romania is one of the 
strongest regional players in terms of technical education, ranking 13th in the world in 
terms of IT graduates, with about 62,000 employed in IT (Vedala, 2007). Its strength in 
IT could help bolster upgrading in the nascent ITES service industry. Poland produces 
400,000, technical and non-technical graduates a year. The country's high level 
capabilities in the ITES industry are demonstrated by its overwhelming concentration in 
R&D (35 percent) and finance and accounting (24 percent) (Kennedy & Sharma, 2009). 
Hi. Latin America 
Mexico and Chile are the two strongest Latin American challengers to India's 
lead in ITES. Mexico's proximity to the US and its language competence in both Spanish 
and English has made it a growing destination for Spanish and English voice services in 
the US, yet the country lacks the technical skill base and the state-society relations that 
proved effective in the Indian case. Chile has an emerging niche IT and ITES service 
market, buoyed by a supportive state. The country has about 65,000 students, with around 
12,000 studying engineering and science. The industry has created a strong niche in R&D 
and analytics services that is upgraded in part from state mining taxes (Kennedy & 
Sharma, 2009; Peterson, Gott, & King, 2011). Both Mexico and Chile have English 
language capability. 
Brazil has a large overall labor pool, although the technical labor pool is weaker 
than India's and the workers tend to have weaker English language skills relative to 
India. The industry is heavily concentrated in IT and the ITES sector has grown slowly. 
The country produces a total of 420,000 graduates each year, with 55,000 of them 
220 
graduating from engineering and science fields (Kennedy & Sharma, 2009). The 
Brazilian government's designation of IT and ITES as a strategic industry in 2000 has 
translated into strong government support of industry, further strengthening a history of 
government partnerships with private sector. Brazil has an active trade association, the 
Brazilian Association of Information Technology and Communication Companies 
(BRASSCOM) that was founded in 2004 that could serve as a source of industry 
advantage. The Brazilian association was modeled on India's business association, 
NASSCOM, which hosted visiting Brazilian industry officials, shared their 
organizational approach to industry promotion in India and approach to interaction with 
the government (personal interview, executive, NASSCOM, 7/10/06). The country has 
approximately 10 million English language speakers, much less than the 90 million India 
has (Gott, 2007). The government and industry are providing opportunities for expanded 
English instruction but the country's lack of capability in English and Spanish hurts its 
opportunities to export service work outside the country. Salaries in the IT and ITES 
industries in Brazil are 50 percent higher than those in India. 
iv. Africa 
South Africa is the strongest challenger in the Africa region and with a large 
English language speaking population, now has hundreds of contact centers serving 
clients in Europe and the US, which could provide a sufficient base to help the country 
move from lower value into higher value services. Yet, significant challenges facing the 
country is further developing the technical skill base, which is small scale and requires 
further state directed effort to increase the numbers in the technical labor pool. The 
country has 21 universities and 15 "technikons"(Kennedy & Sharma, 2009), but 
educational reform is badly needed to improve educational quality and output, which is 
221 
exacerbated by a large gap in student enrollment between white and non-white students. 
Labor costs are relatively high, with the average salary in the IT industry estimated at 
$31,957 (Kennedy & Sharma, 2009). 
In conclusion, trade associations and firms emerged as the central developmental 
actors driving industry development in IT enabled services, with the state playing an 
increasingly supporting role. Upgrading occurred through a number of association and 
firm level mechanisms that built technical and cultural skills over time. At the industry 
level, trade associations assumed more proactive developmental roles in its interaction 
with the government to gain recognition for the industry, lobby for tax breaks and 
deregulation of telecommunications, and finally drafted industry plans in educational 
reform and the development of new industrial hub cities. Firms also played a 
developmental role through significant investments in training in both technical and 
"cultural" skills. Organizations obtained industry knowledge through two key 
mechanisms. One was knowledge transfer and learning within client relationships, while 
the second was through the migration of technical labor educated and trained abroad. 
This interaction of multiple institutional actors in the development of the ITES industry 
demonstrate that rather than a withering away of the state, development requires the 
state's continued involvement, in partnership with other agents in civil society. The 
arrangements of these relationships constitute a new step in Indian development and in 
the service development more generally. 
222 
2006-2010 Exchange Rate (USD/INR) 
55 
50 
45 
40 
35 
Dec-01 Nov-02 Nov-03 Nov-04 Nov-05 
Table 7.1: Dollar to Rupee Currency Exchange January 2006-December 2010 
Source: (OANDA Corporation, 2011) 
223 
Appendix 
Image 1: India - basic country level data 
i t . no m a m f»l»«v 0(ut 
t re*!e TO M S 
« M LorarM fc^it^isJ T LI »JC ((Si 
Population: 
1.13bn(mid-2007) 
Largest Cities: Population in millions, 2001 census 
Mumbai (Bombay): 16.4 
Kolkata (Calcutta): 13.2 
Delhi: 12.8 
Chennai (Madras): 6.4 
Bangalore: 5.7 
Hyderabad: 5.5 
Source: (Business India Intelligence, 2011) 
224 
' • " " " " • f t .-1 ' 
. 
L _ . . . / - " 
• 1 ; . 
1 
y V 
•j • 
i 
f i r " 
J. • ' 
• • ] • ' ' • 
1 • ;-i ft : ; : 
Image 2: Infosys campus 
Pictures of sprawling IT and ITES campuses became ubiquitous in the media in early 
2000s and are emblematic of "Shining India." This photo is of the Infosys Campus in the 
software industrial park, Electronic City, which sits on 43 acres that are walled off from 
the rest of the city, houses 50 separate office building where over 20,000 employees 
work. Other amenities offered at the Infosys Electronics city campus include shops, 
banks, restaurants, a health club, a basketball court, a golf course, swimming pools, and a 
visa processing office. Photo source: (Schifferes, 2007). 
r i - »;i 
:T 
:.-H*l 
Image 3: Lobby of Infosys development center 
The clean lines and the reflection of lighting off of smooth services in the image suggest 
cleanliness, efficiency, and modernization, values that software and service firms seek to 
promote to potential clients. Photo source: ("The lobby of Infosys development centre in 
Mysore," 2004). 
225 
1 • .• ! 
i: "* • • h.v • 
|t- . •• 
AT i 
:X
l,n«m*SP'-
• .." • • • V S T T ' 
- • • • ^ * _ w — ^ .„_ 
• • . • • • 
•< . *<4 
••f 
. , . • . • • ; • • . r' 
. . . 
- • 
• - ( . . • • « . 
< * • • • 
j 
•**. *. i • * • • • 
. 
•• - • • .• - t 
' • • - . - * - >. i 
• ' m E 
T . • • / V » * « \ | 
Image 4: Infosys's business process outsourcing center 
In this photo Infosys's glittering Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) center in 
Bangalore is juxtaposed with make-shift housing for the poor that have arisen next to the 
road bordering Electronic City's IT industrial park This image is atypical in that it 
includes symbols of "Shining India" fore grounded by scenes of poverty Source 
(Schifferes, 2007) 
:'V ?-
i ir-
. : f . . . 
" • i." 
jf&i y-'-A,.••--. -..-•:..•• 
* 
m. i 
Image 5 (left): Call center workforce and workers. 
Photo Source (Bray, 2005) 
Image 6 (right): Call center office cubicles and workers. 
Photo Source (Sharma, 2004] 
226 
v ' -' r -.' 
'J* 
* - -
L. • jj 
Image 7: Teleradiology Solutions office 
Located in Whitefield on the outskirts of Bangalore Source www RadGuru ne 
227 
References 
A bachelor who romanced with IT (2001, April 12). The Tribune. Retrieved September, 
29 2009, from http://www.tribuneindia.com/2001/20010413/biz.htm 
Abbott, A. (1988). The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert 
Labour. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
Agarwal, P. (2006). Higher Education in India: The Need for Change. Worlking Paper 
(Working Paper No. 180). New Delhi: ICRIER. 
Aggarwal, A. (2010a). KPO industry to reach 17bn by 2013-14 (Press Release). 
Saratoga, California: Evalueserve. 
Aggarwal, A. (2010b). LPO and the Great Recession (Press Release). Saratoga, CA: 
Evalueserve. 
Amsden, A. (1989). Asia's Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization. New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Amsden, A. (2001). The Rise of "the Rest". New York: Oxford University Press. 
Amsden, A., & Chu, W.-w. (2003). Beyond Late Development: Taiwan's Upgrading 
Policies. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Antonio, R. J. (2007). The Cultural Construction of Neoliberal Globalization. In G. Ritzer 
(Ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Globalization. Blackwell Reference Online: 
Blackwell Publishing. 
Appelbaum, R. P., Parker, R., Cao, C , & Gereffi, G. (2011). China's (Not-So-Hidden) 
Developmental State: Becoming a Leading Nanotechnology Innovator in the 21st 
Century. In F. Block & M. R. Keller (Eds.), State of Innovation: The U.S. 
Government's Role in Technology Development. Boulder, CO: Paradigm 
Publishers. 
Athreye, S. S. (2005). The Indian Software Industry. In A. Arora & A. Gambardella 
(Eds.), From Underdogs to Tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in 
Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Attewell, P. (1987). The Deskilling Controversy. Work and Occupations, 14(3), 323-346. 
Attewell, P. (1990). What is Skill? Work and Occupations, 17(4), 422-448. 
Bagchi, A. K. (2000). The Past and the Future of the Developmental State. Journal of 
World-Systems Research, 1(2), 398-442. 
Banga, R. (2005a). Critical Issues in India's Service Led Growth (No. 171). New Delhi: 
Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations. 
Banga, R. (2005b). Trade in Services: A Review. Global Economy Journal, 5(2), 1-24. 
Barley, S. R. (1986). Technology as an Occasion for Structuring: Evidence from 
Observations of CT Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 31(1), 78-108. 
Becker, G. (1962). Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis. The Journal of 
Political Economy, 70(No. 5), 9-49. 
Becker, G. (1996). Accounting for Tastes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univesity Press 
228 
Bell, D. (1973). The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting; 
Harper Colophon Books. 
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (1967). The social construction of reality ; a treatise in 
the sociology of knowledge. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday. 
Bhabha, H. (1994). Of Mimicry and Man: The Ambivalence of Colonial Discourse The 
Location of Culture. London: Routledge. 
Bhagwati, J. (1993). India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Block, F. (1994). The Roles of the State in the Economy. In N. J. Smelser & R. Swedberg 
(Eds.), The Handbook of Economic Sociology. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press ; Russell Sage Foundation. 
Block, F. (2008). Swimming Against the Current: The Rise of a Hidden Developmental 
State in the United States. Politics & Society, 36(2), 169-206. 
Block, F., & Evans, P. (2005). The State and the Economy. In N. J. Smelser & R. 
Swedberg (Eds.), The Handbook of Economic Sociology (Vol. Second Edition). 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Block, F., & Keller, M. R. (Eds.). (2011). State of Innovation: The U.S. Government's 
Role in Technology Development. Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers. 
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Bourdieu, P. (2000). Making the economic habitus: Algerian workers revisited. 
Ethnography, 7(1), 17-41. 
Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Bourdieu, P., Wacquant, L. J. D., & Farage, S. (1994). Rethinking the State: Genesis and 
Structure of the Bureaucratic Field. Sociological Theory, 72(1), 1-18. 
Braverman, H. (1974). Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the 
Twentieth Century: New York: Monthly Review Press. 
Bray, M. (Producer). (2005, October 25) The new faces of outsourcing: Offshore 
operations not all about 24-7 call centers. Podcast retrieved from 
http://edition.cnn.com/2005AVORLD/asiapcf/09/14/india.eye.outsourcing/. 
Brenner, N., & Theodore, N. (2002). Cities and the geographies of 'actually existing 
neoliberalism'. In N. Brenner & N. Theodore (Eds.), Spaces of Neoliberalism: 
urban restructuring in North America and Western Europe. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishers Ltd. 
Breznitz, D. (2007). Innovation and the state: political choice and strategies for growth 
in Israel, Taiwan, and Ireland. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Bunker, S. (1984). Modes of Extraction, Unequal Exchange, and the progressive 
underdevelopment of an extreme periphery: The Brazil Amazon, 1600-1980. 
American Journal of Sociology, 89(5), 1017 - 1064. 
Burawoy, M. (1996). The State and Economic Involution: Russia through a China Lens. 
World Development, 24, 1105-1117. 
Business India Intelligence (2006). Industry Briefing: India technology: Accelerated 
development. The Economist Intelligence Unit. Retrieved from 
http://www.eiu.com/ 
229 
Business India Intelligence (2011). Basic Data, Country: India. The Economist 
Intelligence Unit. Retrieved from 
http://country.eiu.com/article.aspx?articleid=377765622&Country=India&topic= 
Summary&subtopic=Basic+data&subsubtopic=Basic+data 
Cardoso, F. (1972). Dependency and Development in Latin America. New Left Review, 
74{ July/August). 
Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of the Network Society (Vol. 1). Oxford, UK: Blackwell 
Publishers. 
Castro, A. (2003, 11/24/2010). Amid complaints, Dell closes overseas call centers. USA 
Today, from http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2003-l 1-24-dell-support-
home_x.htm 
Chandran, K. (2008, October 15). Teleradiology paves way for remote medicine. Reuters. 
Retrieved 2/10/11, from http://www.reuters.com/article/2008/10/15/us-
teleradiology-india-idUSTRE49E01920081015?pageNumber= 1 
Chellaraj, G., Maskus, K. E., & Mattoo, A. (2006). Skilled Immigrants, Higher 
Education, and U.S. Innovation. In C. Ozden & M. Schiff (Eds.), International 
Migration, Remittances & the Brain Drain. Washington DC: World Bank & 
Palgrave MacMillian. 
Chibber, V. (2002). Bureaucratic Rationality and the Developmental State. The American 
Journal of Sociology, 107(4), 951-989. 
Chibber, V. (2004). Locked in Place: State-Building and Late Industrialization in India. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Clark, C. (1940). The Conditions of Economic Progress. London: McMillan. 
Collins, R. (1979). The Credential Society. New York: Academic Press. 
Corbridge, S., & Harriss, J. (2000). Reinventing India: Liberalization, Hindu Nationalism 
and Popular Democracy. Maiden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Inc. 
Cowhey, P., & Richards, J. (2006). The State after Statism: new state activities in the age 
of liberalization. In J. D. Levy (Ed.), The State after Statism: new state activities 
in the age of liberalization. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
D'Costa, A. P. (2005). The long march to capitalism: embourgeoisment, 
internationalization, and industrial transformation in India. Basingstoke, 
Hampshire ; New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
D'Costa, A. P., & Sridharan, E. (2004). Conclusion: Global Links, Domestic Market and 
Policy for Development. In A. P. D'Costa & E. Sridharan (Eds.), India in the 
Global Software Industry: Innovation, Firm Strategies and Development. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillian. 
Dani, S., Ramesh, A., & Singh, A. (2011). Market Vista: 2010 in Review. Dallas: Everest 
Research Institute. 
Darr, A. (2006). Selling Technology: The changing shape of sales in an information 
economy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Das, G. (2002). India Unbound: A Personal Account of a Social and Economic 
Revolution. New York: First Anchor Books. 
Dataquest (2009). The Top 20 Club 2008-2009. 
Dataquest (2010). The Top 20 IT-enhanced Services. 
230 
Debroy, B. (2008). Adjusting to a Knowledge Economy. In I. Pande (Ed.), Beyond 
Degrees: Finding Success in Higher Education. Noida: HarperCollins Publishers 
India. 
DeLong, J. B. (2003). India since Independence: An Analytic Growth Narrative. In D. 
Rodrik (Ed.), In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on Economic Growth. 
Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press. 
Department of Higher Education (2008). Technology, Education, Quality Improvement 
Programme (TEQIP) - Phase II. 
DiMaggio, P., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional 
Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields. American 
Sociological Review, 48, 147-160. 
Dobbs, L. (2004). Exporting America: Why Corporate Greed Is Shipping American Jobs 
Overseas. New York: Time Warner Book Group. 
Dossani, R., & Kenney, M. (2006). Reflections upon "Sizing the Emerging Global Labor 
Market". Academy of Management Perspectives, 20(4), 35-41. 
Drucker, P. (1969). The Age of Discontinuity; Guidelines to Our changing Society. New 
York: Harper and Row. 
Evalueserve (2003). BPO to KPO (white paper). 
Evalueserve (2007). What is my Competitor really up to? New Delhi: Evalueserve. 
Evans, P. B. (1979). Dependent Development: The Alliance of Multinational, State, and 
Local Capital in Brazil. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Evans, P. B. (1995). Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Evans, P. B. (1997). State Structures, Government-Business Relations, and Economic 
Transformation. In S. Maxfield & B. R. Schneider (Eds.), Business and the State 
in Developing Countries. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Fisher, A. G. B. (1935). The Clash of Progress and Security. London: McMillan. 
Form, W. (1987). On the Degradation of Skills. Annual Review of Sociology, 13, 29-47'. 
Forman, H. (2006). Offshoring, teleradiology, and the future of our specialty. American 
Journal of Roentgenology, 187(2). 
Forrest, W. (2007). Mass General, Kent Hospital halt teleradiology talks Retrieved 
December 1, 2010, from www.auntminnie.com 
Frank, A. G. (1972). The Development of Underdevelopment. In J. Cockcroft, A. G. 
Frank & D. Johnson (Eds.), Dependence and Underdevelopment: Latin America's 
Political Economy (pp. 3-17). New York: Anchor Books. 
Friedman, T. L. (2005). The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-first Century. 
New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Gereffi, G. (1999). International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the Apparel 
Commodity Chain. Journal of International Economics 48(1), 37-70. 
Gereffi, G. (2005). The Global Economy: Organization, Governance, and Development. 
In N. J. S. R. Swedberg (Ed.), The Handbook Of Economic Sociology, 2nd edition 
(pp. 160-182). Princeton N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
Gereffi, G., & Korzeniewicz, M. (1994). Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism. 
Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press. 
Goffman, E. (1973). The presentation of self in everyday life. Woodstock, N.Y.: 
Overlook Press. 
231 
Gold, T. B. (1986). State and Society in the Taiwan Miracle. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. 
Gore, C. (2000). The Rise and Fall of the Washington Consensus as a Paradigm for 
Developing Countries. World Development, 28(5), 789- 804. 
Gott, J. (2007). Off shoring for Long-Term Advantage: The 2007 A.T. Kearney Global 
Services Location Index. Chicago, IL: A.T. Kearney,. 
Government of India (2002). Approach Paper to the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-2007). 
Retrieved 2/15/11. from http://www.education.nic.in/documents.asp. 
Government of India (2007a). 11th Plan Document on Education. Retrieved 2/15/11. 
from http://www.education.nic.in/plan/XrPlandocument.pdf. 
Government of India (2007b). The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-08 to 2011-12) 
Retrieved 2/15/11. from 
planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/11th/.../I lth_voll .pdf. 
Government of India (2010). Report to the people on Educatkm-2009-10. Retrieved 
2/15/11. from http://www.education.nic.in/documents.asp. 
Government of India Planning Commission (2009). Report of the Steering Committee: 
Secondary, Higher & Technical Education For the Eleventh Five Year Plan 
(2007-2012). New Delhi: Government of India Planning Commission. 
Greenwood, R., Suddaby, R., & Hinings, C. R. (2002). Theorizing Change: The Role of 
Professional Associations in the Transformation of Institutionalized Fields. 
Academy of Management Journal, 45(1), 58-80. 
Grugulis, I., & Vincent, S. (2009). Whose skill is it anyway?: 'soft' skills and 
polarization. Work, Employment and Society, 23(4), 597-615. 
Guha, R. (2008). Crucibles of Modernity. In I. Pande (Ed.), Beyond Degrees: Finding 
Success in Higher Education. Noida: HarperCollins Publishers India. 
Gupta, S. P. (2002). Report of the Committee on India Vision 2020. Retrieved 2/28/11. 
from planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/pl_vsn2020.pdf. 
Habermas, J. (1989). The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry 
into a Category of Bourgeois Society. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Hall, P. A., & Soskice, D. W. (2001). Varieties of capitalism: the institutional 
foundations of comparative advantage. Oxford [England]: Oxford University 
Press. 
Hanser, A. (2008). Service encounters: class, gender, and the market for social 
distinction in urban China. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. 
Hart, S. L. (2005). Capitalism at the Crossroads: The Unlimited Business Opportunities 
in Solving the World's Most Difficult Problems. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton 
School Publishing. 
Harvey, D. (2005). A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Heeks, R. (1996). India's Software Industry: State policy, liberation and industrial 
development. New Delhi: Sage Publications. 
Herring, R. (1999). Embedded Particularism: India's Failed Developmental State. In M. 
Woo-Cumings (Ed.), The Developmental State (pp. 306-334). Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Cornell University Press. 
Hirst, P., & Thompson, G. (1995). Globalization and the Future of the Nation-State. 
Economy and Society, 24(3), 408-442. 
Hochschild, A. R. (1983). The managed heart: commercialization of human feeling. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
232 
Howell, C. (2006). The State and the Reconstruction of Industrial Relations Institutions 
after Fordism: Britain and France Compared. In J. D. Levy (Ed.), The State after 
Statism: new state activities in the age of liberalization. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press. 
Huffman, R. I., Lewis, R. S., Forman, H. P., & Sunshine, J. H. (2010). The Performance 
of Outside Readings by Radiology Practices. American Journal of Roentgenology, 
195, 1159-1163. 
Jessop, B. (1990). State Theory: Putting the Capitalist State in Its Place. London: Polity 
Press. 
Jessop, B. (2007). Knowledge as a Fictitious Commodity: Insights and Limits of a 
Polanyian Perspective. In A. Bugra & M. Mendell (Eds.), Market Economy as a 
Political Project. Reading Karl Polanyi for The 21st Century. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave. 
Johnson, C. (1982). MITI and the Japanese Miracle: the growth of industrial policy, 
1925-1975. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. 
Joshi, V., & Little, I. M. D. (1996). India's economic reforms : 1991-2001. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
Kalyanpur, A. (2008). Commentary 3 - Radiology in India: The next decade, [online 
serial]. Indian Journal of Radiology Imaging, 18, 191-192. 
Kalyanpur, A., MD, Neklesa, V. P., MD, Pham, D. T„ MD, Forman, H. P., MD, MBA, 
Stein, S. T., BA, MPH, & Brink, J. A., MD (2004). Implementation of an 
International Teleradiology Staffing Model. Radiology, 232(2), 4. 
Kalyanpur, A., Weinberg, J., Neklesa, V. P., Brink, J., & Forman, H. (2003). Emergency 
radiology coverage: technical and clinical feasibility of an international 
teleradiology model. Emergency Radiology, 10(3), 115-118. 
Kanavi, S. (2001, February 19-March 4). Power Lobbying. Business India. 
Kannan, S. (2008, May 12). Single window key for growth of SEZs. The Hindu, 
Kennedy, R. E., & Sharma, A. (2009). The services shift: seizing the ultimate offshore 
opportunity. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: FT Press. 
Knowledge® Wharton (2007). Indian BPO Firms Step Out of the Back Office, toward 
Knowledge Process Outsourcing and Beyond. 
Kohli, A. (1989). Politics of Economic Liberalization in India. World Development, 
77(3), 305-328. 
Kohli, A. (2004). State-directed development: political power and industrialization in the 
global periphery. Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Krippner, G. R. (2007). The making of US monetary policy: Central bank transparency 
and the neoliberal dilemma. Theory and Society, 36(6), 477-513. 
Lall, S. (2003). Indicators of the relative importance of IPRs in developing countries. 
Research POlicy, 32(9), 1657-1680. 
Larkin, G. (1978). Medical dominance and control: Radiographers in the division of 
labor. Sociological Review, 26, 843-858. 
Larson, M. S. (1977). The Rise of Professionalism. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press. 
Leidner, R. (1993). Fast food, fast talk: service work and the routinization of everyday 
life. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
233 
Levy, F., & Yu, K. H. (2006). Offshoring Radiology Services to India: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
Levy, J. D. (2006). The State Also Rises: The roots of Contemporary State Activism. In 
J. D. Levy (Ed.), The State after Statism: new state activities in the age of 
liberalization (pp. xiii, 469 p.). Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Lewis, R. S., Sunshine, J. H., & Bhargavan, M. (2009). Radiology Practices' Use of 
External Off-Hours Teleradiology Services in 2007 and Changes Since 2003. 
American Journal of Roentgenology, 193, 1333 - 1339. 
Lievens, A., Moenaert, R. K., & Jegers, R. S. (1999). Linking communication to 
innovation success in the financial services industry: a case study analysis. 
International Journal of Service Industry Management, 10(1), 23-48. 
Lindblom, C. E. (1977). Politics and markets: the world's political economic systems. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Lloyd, C , & Payne, J. (2009). 'Full of Sound and Fury, Signifying Nothing': 
interrogating new skill concepts in service work - the view from two UK call 
centres Work, Employment and Society, 2J(4), 617-634. 
Lorenzoni, G., & Lipparini, A. (1999). The leveraging of interfirm relationships as a 
distinctive organizational capability: a longitudinal study. Strategic Management 
Journal, 20(4), 317 - 338. 
Lovelock, C , & Gummesson, E. (2004). Whither Services Marketing? Journal of Service 
Research, 7(1), 20-41. 
Majone, G. (Ed.). (1990). Deregulation or Re-regulation?: Regulatory reform in Europe 
and the United States. London: Printer Publishers. 
Manimala, M. J. (2008). Evolution of the Bangalore ICT Cluster: A stage theory based on 
the crystal growth model. In E. G. Carayannis & P. Formica (Eds.), Knowledge 
Matters: Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Innovation Networks 
and Knowledge Clusters. New York: Palgrave Macmillian. 
Maxfield, S., & Schneider, B. R. (1997). Business and the State in Developing Countries. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Menon, R., & Mishra, B. R. (2009, September 21). "Infosys logs on to luxury with 
World's Largest Training Centre". Business Standard. Retrieved Nov 16, 2009, 
from http://www.business-standard.com/india/storypage.php?autono=370746 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (2010a). Draft of the Indian Institute of 
Information Technology Bill 2010. Retrieved 2/15/11. from 
www.education.nic.in/Acts/IIITBill-2010.pdf. 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (2010b). Table 161: Number of Recognized 
Educational Institutions. New Delhi: Government of India. 
Mirchandani, K., & Maitra, S. (2007). Learning Imperialism through training in 
transnational call centres. In T. Fenwick (Ed.), Educating the Global Workforce-
Knowledge Work, Knowledge Workers (pp. 154-164). London: Routledge. 
Monegain, B. (2010). vRad to acquire NightHawk Retrieved Janurary 25, 2011, from 
http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/vrad-acquire-nighthawk 
Moss, P., & Tilly, C. (1996). "Soft" Skills and Race: An Investigation of Black Men's 
Employment Problems Work and Occupations, 23(3), 252-276. 
Moss, P., & Tilly, C. (2001). Stories Employers Tell: Race, Skill, and Hiring in America. 
New York: Russell Sage. 
234 
Murthy, N. R. N. (2007). Transcript of LIVE Chat with Chief Mentor of Infosys, N R 
Narayana Murthy. New Delhi: Indiatimes Chat. 
Nadeem, S. (2009). Macaulay's (Cyber) Children: The Cultural Politics of Outsourcing in 
India Cultural Sociology, 3(1), 102-122. 
Nadeem, S. (2011). Dead Ringers: How Outsourcing is Changing the Way Indians 
Understand Themselves. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
NASSCOM (2006a). Annual Report 2005-06. New Delhi: NASSCOM. 
NASSCOM (2006b). Knowledge Professionals in India. New Delhi: NASSCOM. 
NASSCOM (2006c). Medical Transcription Outsourcing New Delhi: NASSCOM. 
NASSCOM (2006d, 24 Jul, 2006). NASSCOM's Security Initiatives Retrieved October 
21,2009, from 
http://www.nasscom.in/Nasscom/templates/NormalPage.aspx?id=5957 
NASSCOM (2006e). The rise of Tier II and III destinations. NASSCOM Newsline. 
Retrieved Oct 19, 2009, from 
http://www. nasscom. in/Nasscom/templates/NormalPage.aspx?id=48279 
NASSCOM (2008). Model Detailed Project Report: Establishment of 20 Indian Institutes 
of Information Technology (IIITs). New Delhi. 
NASSCOM (2009a). Annual Report 2008-09. New Delhi: NASSCOM. 
NASSCOM (Producer). (2009b) Presentation on NASSCOM Student Center. Podcast 
retrieved from http://www.scribd.eom/docinfo/l3 244223 ?access_key=key-
Iqfgyag7mdskvll92zrb. 
NASSCOM (2010). IT-BPO Sector in India: Strategic Review 2010 Delhi: NASSCOM. 
NASSCOM, & Kearney, A. T. (2008). Location Roadmapfor IT- BPO Growth: 
Assessment of 50 leading cities. 
NASSCOM, & McKinsey (2005). NASSCOM-McKinsey Report: Extending India's 
Leadership of the Global IT and BPO Industries. 
Nasscom chief Dewang Mehta found dead in Sydney (2001, April 12). Rediff.com. 
Retrieved September 28, 2009, from 
http://www.rediff.com/money/2001/apr/12dewang.htm 
Nasscom miffed with current IT SEZ norms (2006, July 15). The Financial Express, from 
http://www.financialexpress.com/news/nasscom-miffed-with-current-it-sez-
norms/171128/ 
Natarajan, G. (2001, April 28). Is there Life Beyond Dewang Mehta? Retrieved 
September 29, 2009, from http://dqindia.ciol.com/content/guest/101042801.asp 
National Knowledge Commission (2007). Report to the Nation 2006. New Delhi: 
Government of India. 
North, D. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
O'Riain, S. (2000). The Flexible Developmental State: Globalization, Information 
Technology, and the 'Celtic Tiger'. Politics and Society, 2S(June), 157-193. 
O'Riain, S. (2004). The Politics of High-Tech Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
OANDA Corporation (2011). Historical Exchange Rates USD/INR. New York: OANDA 
Corporation. 
235 
Oliver, C. (1997). The influence of institutional and task environment relationships on 
organizational performance: The Canadian construction industry. Journal of 
Management Studies, 34, 99-124. 
Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action; Public Goods and the Theory of 
Groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2009). Average annual hours 
actually worked per worker, 1979-2009. Washington, DC: Economic Policy 
Institute. 
Otis, E. M. (2008). Beyond the Industrial Paradigm: Market-Embedded Labor and the 
Gender Organization of Global Service Work in China. American Sociological 
Review, 73(1), 15-36. 
Pager, D., Bonikowski, B., & Western, B. (2009). Discrimination in a Low-Wage Labor 
Market: A Field Experiment. American Sociological Review, 74(5), 777-799. 
Panagariya, A. (2008). India: The Emerging Giant. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Paradise, A. (2007). State of the Industry Report. Alexandria, VA: American Society for 
Training & Development. 
Parthasarathi, A., & Joseph, K. J. (2004). Innovation Under Export Orientation. In A. P. 
D'Costa & E. Sridharan (Eds.), India in the Global Software Industry: Innovation, 
Firm Strategies and Development. New York: Palgrave Macmillian. 
Patnaik, U. (1999). Commercialization under Colonial Conditions. In U. Patnaik (Ed.), 
The Long Transition: Essays on Political Economy. Delhi: Tulika Books. 
Peck, J. (2004). Geography and public policy: constructions of neoliberalism. Progress in 
Human Geography, 28, 392 - 405. 
Peterson, E., Gott, J., & King, S. (2011). Offshoring Opportunities Amid Economic 
Turbulence: The A. T. Kearney Global Services Location Index. Chicago, IL: A.T. 
Kearney, Inc. 
Pingle, V. (1999). Rethinking the Developmental State: India's Industry in Comparative 
Perspective. New York, NY: St. Martin's Press. 
Pitroda, S. (2008). Of Grades and Graduates. In I. Pande (Ed.), Beyond Degrees: Finding 
Success in Higher Education. Noida: HarperCollins Publishers India. 
Plant, R. (2010). The neo-liberal state. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Polanyi, K. ( 2001 [1944]). The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic 
Origins of Our Time (2nd ed.). Boston: Beacon Press. 
Polanyi, M. (1967). The Tacit Dimension. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
Pollack, A. (2003, November 16). Who's Reading Your X-Ray? New York Times, 
Porter, M. E. (2000). Location, Competition, and Economic Development: Local Clusters 
in a Global Economy. Economic Development Quarterly, 74(1), 15-32. 
Poster, W. (2007). Who's On the Line? Indian Call Center Agents Pose as Americans for 
U.S.-Outsourced Firms. Industrial Relations, 46(2), 271-304. 
Prada, P., & Sheth, N.'(2009, April 18). Delta Air Ends Use of India Call Centers. The 
Wall Street Journal, 
Prahalad, C. K. (2005). The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty 
Through Profits. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing. 
Rai, S. (2010, September 7). The civil war of Bangalore. Indian Express. Retrieved 
10/3/10, from http://www.indianexpress.com/news/the-civil-war-of-
bangalore/678133/0 
236 
Ridley, E. L. (2008). Wise planning helps bring 3D lab to the community practice 
Retrieved December 1, 2010 from www.auntminnie.com 
Rodrik, D., & Subramanian, A. (2005). From "Hindu Growth" to Productivity Surge: The 
Mystery of the Indian Growth Transition. IMF Staff Papers, 52(2). 
Rose, C. (Writer) (2006). A conversation with chairman of WIPRO Azim Premji 
[television]. In C. Rose (Producer). Bangalore, India: Charlie Rose Inc. 
Rose, C. (Writer) (2007). A conversation with Azim Premji, Chairman of Wipro 
[television]. In C. Rose (Producer). USA: Charlie Rose Inc. 
Rudolph, L. I., & Rudolph, S. H. (1987). In Pursuit of Lakshmi: The Political Economy 
of the Indian State. . Chicago, IL: University Of Chicago Press. 
Said, E. (1979). Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books. 
Sassen, S. (2001). The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo (Second ed.). Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Saxenian, A. (2000). Bangalore: The Silicon Valley of Asia? Paper presented at the 
Indian Economic Prospects: Advancing Policy Reform. 
Saxenian, A. (2006). The New Argonauts: Regional Advantage in a Global Economy. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Schifferes, S. (Producer). (2007, February 2) Photo journal: Bangalore. Podcast retrieved 
from 
http ://news .bbc. co. uk/2/shared/spl/hi/picture_gallery/07/africa_bangalore/html/1. s 
tm. 
Schlosser, J. (2006, March 17). Harder than Harvard. Fortune. 
Schneider, B. R. (2004). Business politics and the State in twentieth-century Latin 
America. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sen, A. K. (2000). Amartya Sen on Kerala. New Delhi: Institute of Social Sciences. 
Sharma, P. (Producer). (2004, March 28) Storm in the USA, clouds over India. Spectrum. 
Podcast retrieved from 
http://www.tribuneindia.com/2004/20040328/spectrum/main 1 .htm. 
Sherman, R. (2006). Class acts service and inequality in luxury hotels. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Sinha, A. (2005). Understanding the Rise and Transformation of Business Collective 
Action in India. Business and Politics, 7(2). 
Slaughter, A.-M. (2004). A new world order. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
Software Technology Parks of India (2011). Special Economic Zone Retrieved March 18, 
2011, from 
http://www.stpi.in/indexl.php?langid=l&level=0&linkid=137&lid=208 
Somers, M. R., & Block, F. (2005). From Poverty to Perversity: Ideas, Markets, and 
Institutions over 200 Years of Welfare Debate. American Sociological Review, 
70(2), 260-287. 
Special Correspondent (2008, August 3). "Infosys spends Rs. 750 crore on training fresh 
recruits" The Hindu. Retrieved Nov 19th, 2009, from 
http://www.hindu.com/2008/08/03/stories/2008080356251500.htm 
Spenner, K. I. (1979). Temporal changes in work content. American Sociological Review, 
44, 968-975. 
Spenner, K. I. (1983). Deciphering Prometheus: Temporal Changes in the Skill Level of 
Work. American Sociological Review, 48, 824-837. 
237 
Spivak, G. (1988). Can the Subaltern Speak? In C. Nelson & L. Grossberg (Eds.), 
Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture. London: Macmillian. 
Srinivasan, T. N. (2005). Comments on 'From 'Hindu Growth' to Productivity Surge: The 
Mystery of the Indian Growth Transition'. IMF Staff Papers, 52(2). 
Stiglitz, J. E. (2002). Globalization and its Discontents. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Strange, S. (1996). The Retreat of the state: the diffusion of power in the world economy. 
Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Streech, W., & Schmitter, P. (1985). Private Interest Government. San Francisco: Sage 
Publications. 
Sturgeon, T. J. (2002). Modular production networks: a new American model of 
industrial organization Industrial and Corporate Change, 11(3), 451-496. 
Subramanyam, C , & Khan, S. (2010). Queen of Hearts. Women. 
Sunshine, J. H., & Meghea, C. (2006). How Could the Radiologist Shortage Have Eased? 
American Journal of Roentgenology, 187, 1160-1165. 
Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies. American Sociological 
Review, 57,273-286. 
Swidler, A. (2001). Talk of Love: How Culture Matters. Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press. 
Swidler, A. (2008). Comment on Stephen Vaisey's "Socrates, Skinner, and Aristotle: 
Three Ways of Thinking About Culture in Action". Sociological Forum, 23(3), 
614-618. 
Taylor, P., & Bain, P. (2005). 'India calling to the far away towns': the call centre labour 
process and globalization. Work, Employment & Society, 19(2), 261-282. 
Teather, D. (2007, September 14). Indian outsourcer on the inside track: The chief 
executive of Infosys has profited from embracing globalisation and all its 
opportunities. Guardian. Retrieved July, 28 2007, from 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2007/sep/14/globalisation.india 
The lobby of Infosys development centre in Mysore. (2004, 11/19/05). Podcast retrieved 
from http://specials.rediff.com/money/2004/aug/05sld5.htm. 
Thibodeau, P. (2005, May 2). Offshore Tech Support Still Stirs Controversy; Some say 
communication is a problem, but outsourcing of help desks continues. 
Computerworld, 
Thompson, T. L. (2004). Thrall cites risks of outsourcing in RSNA opener Retrieved 
December 1, 2010, from www.AuntMinnie.com 
Thrall, J. H., M.D. (2004). Outsourcing: Threat or Opportunity? Paper presented at the 
Radiological Society of North America 90th Scientific Assembly and Annual 
Meeting. 
Timmons, H. (2010, August 4). Outsourcing to India Draws Western Lawyers. New York 
Times. Retrieved August 4, 2010, from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/05/business/global/051egal.html?scp=l&sq=out 
sourcing%201egal%20services&st=cse 
Trefler, D. (2005). Service Offshoring: Threats and Opportunities. Brookings Trade 
Forum 2005 (2005) 35-60. 
Tucker, A. (2008). Trade Associations as Industry Reputation Agents: A Model of 
Reputational Incentives (Working Paper 27). London: School of Public Policy 
Working Paper Series. 
238 
U.S. Department of State (2010). Background Note: China. Retrieved March 18, 2011. 
from http://www.state.gOv/r/pa/ei/bgn/l 8902.htm. 
UNCTAD (2004). World Investment Report 2004: The Shift Towards Services. New 
York: United Nations. 
UNICEF (2003-2008). India Basic Indicators, from 
http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/india_statistics.html 
Upadhya, C., & Vasavi, A. R. (2006). Work, Culture, and Sociality in the Indian IT 
Industry: A Sociological Study. Bangalore: NIAS. 
Vallas, S. P. (1990). The Concept of Skill: A Critical Review. Work and Occupations, 
77(4), 379-398. 
Vedala, S. (2007). Global Sourcing: Comparative Analysis of Key Offshore Geographies. 
New Delhi: EquaTerra. 
Wacquant, L. J. D. (Ed.) (2004) International Encyclopedia of Economic Sociology. 
London: Routledge. 
Wade, R. (1990a). Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Government 
in East Asian Industrialization. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Wade, R. (1990b). Industrial Policy in East Asia: Does it Lead or Follow the Market? In 
G. G. a. D. Wyman (Ed.), Manufacturing Miracles: Paths of Industrialization in 
Latin America and East Asia (pp. 231-266). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Wade, R. (2003). What strategies are viable for developing countries today? The World 
Trade Organization and the shrinking of 'development space'. Review of 
International Political Economy, 70(4), 621 - 644 
Wadhwa, V., de Vitton, U. K., & Gereffi, G. (2008). How the Disciple Became the Guru. 
SSRN eLibrary. 
Wadwa, V., Gereffi, G., Rissing, B., & Ong, R. (2007). Where the Engineers Are. Issues 
in Science and Technology, April 9, 73-84. 
Wallerstein, I. (1974). The Modern World System I: Capitalist Agriculture and the 
Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century. New York: 
Academic Press. 
Weiner, M. (1991). The Child and the State in India: Child Labor and Education Policy 
in Comparative Perspective. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press. 
Weiss, R. S. (1994). Learning From Strangers: the Art and Method of Qualitative 
Interview Studies. New York, NY: The Free Press. 
Wharton, A. S. (2009). The Sociology of Emotional Labor. Annual Review of Sociology, 
Vol. 35, 147-165. 
Williamson, J. (2000). What Should the World Bank Think about the Washington 
Consensus? World Bank Reseach Observer, 75(2), 251-264. 
Wrong, Y. (2008, June). Telerad school in Bangalore aims at shortage. Diagnostic 
Imaging: The newsmagazine of Imaging Innovation & economics. 
Yee, K. (2008). Teleradiology: A threat to local practices? Retrieved 2010, December 1, 
from www.auntminnie.com 
Yin, R. K. (2002). Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
239 
